TransportationResearchPartB166(2022)143–182
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Transportation Research Part B
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trb
Rich arc routing problem in city logistics: Models and solution
algorithms using a fluid queue-based time-dependent travel
time representation
Jiawei Lua, Qinghui Nieb, Monirehalsadat Mahmoudic, Jishun Oub,*,
Chongnan Lid, Xuesong Simon Zhoua,*
aSchool of Sustainable Engineering and the Built Environment, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, 85281, USA
bCollege of Architectural Science and Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225127, China
cSchool of Packaging, College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, 48824, USA
dSchool of Traffic and Transportation, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: City logistics, as an essential component of the city operation system, aims at managing the
City logistics complex flow of goods and services from providers to customers efficiently. Delays associated
Rich arc routing problem (RARP) with peak-period traffic congestion exists in both large and small metropolitan areas. As many of
Time-dependent travel time
the service tasks in city logistics are needed to be performed during peak hours, operators of
Societal impact
urban management movement should consider reducing the total trip time and delay when
Lagrangian relaxation
designing service plans. Equally important, the congestion impact of service vehicles to other road
Branch and price solution method
users should also be considered. In this paper, we focus on formulating and solving rich arc
routing problems (RARPs) in city logistics with a congested urban environment. We highlight the
needs of embedding a structurally parsimonious time-dependent travel time model in RARP for
producing high-quality and practically useful solutions. A fluid queue model based analytical
approach is presented for link travel time calibration in the form of polynomial arrival rate
functions. Accordingly, system-wide (societal) impact of vehicles routing is analytically derived
and incorporated into the RARP models which enables traffic managers to systematically consider
operation costs and societal impacts when designing routing policies in real-life city logistics
applications. Additionally, we develop two new representation schemes for time-dependent travel
time modeling in RARPs, including a discretized time-expanded representation scheme and a
nonlinear polynomial representation scheme. Three modeling approaches for RARPs are pro-
posed, with different perspectives of capturing time-dependent travel time and formulating
problem-specific constraints. With a real-life sprinkler truck routing problem as the representative
example of RARP, we develop two efficient exact solution algorithms, including a Lagrangian
relaxation-based method and a branch-and-price based method. The latter one is embedded with
an enhanced parallel branch-and-bound algorithm. Extensive numerical experiments are con-
ducted based on real-world networks and traffic flow data to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed methods.
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: jishun@yzu.edu.cn (J. Ou), xzhou74@asu.edu (X.S. Zhou).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2022.10.011
Received 17 March 2022; Received in revised form 12 October 2022; Accepted 27 October 2022
Availableonline4November2022
0191-2615/©2022ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
1. Introduction
In a broader sense, city logistics refers to the management of the flow of goods and services from providers to customers in urban
areas. The urban management movement (UMM) problem (Cattaruzza et al., 2017), as an example, aims to find an optimal set of routes
for a fleet of vehicles to satisfy requests for the development, public maintenance, and other functional needs in a city. An efficient city
logistics system helps to reduce operation cost, mitigate traffic congestion impact, protect the environment, respond to climate change,
connect underserved communities, and support economic vitality. Considering the traffic congestion experienced in cities, this type of
problems needs to be formulated as rich arc routing problems (RARPs) under congested traffic conditions.
The word “rich” is used in RARP because besides normal constraints in the variants of the standard ARP (e.g., capacity and time
window constraint), some other problem-specific constraints are also considered. For example, in the winter gritting problem, service
requests on road links change with time and weather conditions (Eglese and Li, 1992; Eglese, 1994; Li and Eglese, 1996; Tagmouti
et al., 2007; Tagmouti et al., 2010; Tagmouti et al., 2011), or in the snow plowing problem, truck routes are specified at the lane level
(Perrier et al., 2007a; Perrier et al., 2007b; Salazar-Aguilar et al., 2012; Dussault et al., 2013; Dussault et al., 2014; Quirion-Blais et al.,
2017; Castro Campos et al., 2020). Rich constraints considered in RARPs have great practical significance and values while, at the same
time, they bring additional challenges, especially for large-scale instances. By fully recognizing rich features in transportation net-
works, we aim to develop a modeling framework and solution approaches for RARPs that can systematically examine traffic-oriented
characteristics.
One of the most important “rich” features of transportation networks is time-varying traffic conditions. Service vehicles may
experience time-dependent travel times on roads when serving customers (Liu et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2021). In early research on both
vehicle routing problems (VRPs) and ARPs, travel times on links are treated as constant or time-independent; however, in a congested
urban environment, solutions obtained with the constant travel time assumption may significantly underestimate the delay and could
even lead to infeasibility under tight schedules in real-life applications. Although many recent VRP studies considered piecewise travel
time functions to capture time-varying traffic conditions in a more realistic fashion, as discussed by Vidal et al. (2021), additional
efforts are still critically needed to offer more precise approximations/representations of reality. On the other hand, in the ARP
literature, time-dependent travel times have been largely simplified or ignored (Gendreau et al., 2015). Vidal et al. (2021) first
conducted extensive studies on the ARP with time-dependent travel times at a network level and proposed methods for quick travel and
service time queries as well as quickest path queries, based on the travel speed function definition given by Ichoua et al. (2003).
Another important goal of RARPs on transportation networks is how to reduce the system-wide (societal) congestion impact of
service vehicle routings. RARP applications in city logistics are typically fulfilled by large trucks, e.g., freight trucks and street
sweeping trucks. A service truck with a much lower driving speed could affect traffics on multiple lanes which leads to another
important class of moving bottleneck problems studied in the literature (see e.g., Li et al., 2020). Thus, RARP applications in city
logistics should minimize not only the total operating cost for meeting customer requests but also the potential negative effects to the
Table 1
Three major methods for representing time-dependent travel times in VRP/ARP.
Graphical illustration of methods Description
Method type: piecewise-constant travel time function
Modeling details: each link has a constant travel time
within each pre-defined time period
FIFO property: not necessarily satisfied
Method type: piecewise-linear travel time function
Modeling details: each link has a constant travel time
within each pre-defined time period; a linear transition
line is built between two adjacent periods
FIFO property: satisfied
Method type: piecewise-linear travel time function
Modeling details: a piecewise-constant travel speed
function is constructed for each link first; piecewise-linear
travel time function is then derived based on its
corresponding speed function
FIFO property: satisfied
144
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
background transportation system.
1.1. Related studies
In this section, we review related existing studies along two lines: (1) time-dependent travel time modeling in vehicle routing
problems and arc routing problems and (2) rich arc routing problems
1.1.1. Time-dependent travel time modeling in vehicle routing problems and arc routing problems
The important study by Malandraki (1989) first formulated link travel time as a piecewise-constant function of the departure time.
Later on, this approach was adopted by Malandraki and Daskin (1992) and Chen et al. (2006). Yet, this approach might not satisfy the
First-In-First-Out (FIFO) property. The FIFO property states that, among two identical vehicles that travel along the same path, the one
that departs earlier from the origin node could always arrive at the destination node earlier than the other vehicle. Two major ap-
proaches are proposed to address the potential FIFO violation issue in the piecewise constant representation. First, piecewise-linear
functions are considered by Ahn and Shin (1991) and improved by Fleischmann et al. (2004). In this approach, a linear transition
function is built to connect travel times in two adjacent time periods such that travel time changes slowly and smoothly. It can be
proved that the FIFO property holds if the slope of linear lines is less than 45○. Another method proposed by Ichoua et al. (2003) starts
with time-dependent link travel speed in the form of a piecewise-constant function and derives/computes piecewise-linear travel times
satisfying the FIFO property. Table 1 summarizes the above three major methods for time-dependent travel time modeling in VRP and
ARP models. Xiao and Konak (2016) offers a more detailed classification and illustration.
Figliozzi (2012) offered a comprehensive set of benchmarks for modeling time-dependent travel times in VRP. The important
modeling aspect of time discretization is further studied by Boland et al. (2017) for a broader class of continuous-time shortest path and
service network design problems. One can find the related studies in Scherr et al. (2020), Belieres et al. (2021), He et al. (2021),
Marshall et al. (2021), Vu et al. (2022), Hewitt (2022), and Lagos et al. (2022). In particular, for the fundamentally important
time-dependent shortest path problem, the study by He et al. (2021) systematically considers degree 4 and degree 6 polynomial
functions to approximate time-dependent travel time through the piecewise linear interpolants sampled at integer points. The poly-
nomial function can be calibrated for an extended time period (e.g., 24 hours of a day) using real world travel time data, while the
related non-linear functional form could have many local minima and maxima, which could greatly affect the computational efficiency
of dynamic discretization discovery algorithms (see Boland et al., 2017).
In fact, how to obtain reliable and accurate travel time estimates from field data has remained a challenging problem for the VRP
field, while many published papers still use randomly generated or hypothetical travel time distributions for simplicity. By utilizing
data from advanced traffic information systems in Berlin, Fleischmann et al. (2004) proposed a smoothing method to ensure the
resulting travel time functions satisfy the FIFO property. By using traffic flow data collected from a Belgian highway, Jabali et al.
(2009) created a speed profile with five periods, including two periods for morning and afternoon peak hours and three periods for the
remaining non-peak hours, for each link within the research area. Kritzinger et al. (2012) adopted 15-minute link travel time infor-
mation from floating car data and developed an extended version of Dijkstra’s algorithm to compute the distance matrices between
points with various departure times. In the paper by Gmira et al. (2021), the authors developed a discrete-event simulator that
generates travel speed updates for real-time vehicle routing applications. Different from the aforementioned numerically driven
approximation approaches, Van Woensel et al. (2007) first proposed an innovative queue-theoretic modeling scheme for calibrating
expected travel times which was adopted in the studies by Van Woensel et al. (2008) and Lecluyse et al. (2009).
1.1.2. Rich arc routing problems
Considerable efforts have been devoted to the ARP and its variants. Interested readers are referred to a number of survey papers
(Wøhlk, 2008; Corber´an and Prins, 2010; Corber´an and Laporte, 2015; Moura˜o and Pinto, 2017; Corbera´n et al., 2021). In this sub-
section, with the focus on mathematical modeling and solution method development, we review the existing studies along two
research lines, including real-life applications of RARP on urban networks and ARP with time-dependent travel times.
(1) Three representative applications of RARP as the urban management movement problem
Sprinkler truck routing problem: Li et al. (2008) investigated the water truck routing problem in open pit mines in which the travel
time along a road for each truck is not fixed but relies on its leading truck on the same road. The authors proposed minimum cost flow
and set-partitioning based heuristics solution algorithms. Huang and Lin (2014) formulated the street tree watering problem as the
periodic arc routing problem with refill points where the watering frequency of each street tree may not be fixed and needs to be
scheduled according to the period of watering activity. A graph transformation strategy was first adopted to convert the original
problem to a VRP with an ant colony heuristic algorithm. Riquelme-Rodríguez et al. (2014) introduced periodic capacitated arc routing
problem with inventory constraints that models the loss of humidity on each road with an inventory consumption function. The
quantity of water delivered was considered to be fixed or variable. Two mathematical optimization models were proposed and solved
by the commercial solver CPLEX.
Street sweeping problem: Street sweeping requires a special vehicle equipped with a rotating brush that can move along the roadside
and sweep material into a container on the vehicle. Early studies (Bodin and Kursh, 1978; Eglese and Murdock, 1991) modeled the
street sweeping problem as the capacitated Chinese postman problem and developed heuristics to find reasonable routes for the
road-sweeping vehicles. Blazquez et al. (2012) considered two extra “rich” constraints in sweeper route design: the sweepers must visit
145
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
each selected street exactly as many times as its number of street sides; certain types of turns are not allowed to use. The original ARP
was transformed into a VRP which was further solved by a nearest neighbor heuristic algorithm.
Waste collection problem: Moura˜o and Almeida (2000) and Moura˜o and Amado (2005) examined the waste collection problem on
randomly generated networks and proposed lower bounds and a three-phase heuristic that transforms one of the lower bound solutions
to a feasible one. Maniezzo (2004) considered additional bin compatibility, forbidden turns and one-way street constraints in the
model, which is solved by a local search-based heuristic. Ghiani et al. (2005) considered practical constraints in waste collection, e.g.,
large vehicles are not allowed to use some narrow streets, or services at some sites have to be scheduled at night to avoid traffic
congestion. The problem was solved by a cluster-first route-second based heuristic. Many other constraints include traffic regulations
(Bautista et al., 2008), mobile depots (Del Pia and Filippi, 2006), intermediate facilities (Ghiani et al., 2001), and trip length re-
strictions (Ghiani et al., 2010). Recently, Willemse and Joubert (2016a) integrated major problem features of early studies and studied
the mixed capacitated arc routing problem with time window and intermediate facilities (MCARPTWIF). Four constructive heuristics
were developed and comprehensively evaluated. Given splitting procedures play a key role in giant tour-based heuristics and
meta-heuristics, the authors further proposed optimal and heuristic splitting procedures for the MCARPTWIF (Willemse and Joubert,
2016b). In a follow-up study (Willemse and Joubert, 2019), three acceleration mechanisms for local search meta-heuristics were
developed to better cope with large-scale instances.
In general, there are three categories of approaches for solving RARPs, including constructive heuristics, meta-heuristics, and exact
approaches (Corbera´n and Laporte, 2015). Constructive heuristics are designed based on problem features and typically provide a
single final solution, while meta-heuristics are more general and can be applied to any problems. Both approaches cannot produce
measurable quality of solutions. Exact optimization approaches and related model reformulations have not been studied extensively
for RAPPs, especially with the consideration of time-varying traffic conditions.
(2) ARP with time-dependent travel times
Several VRP-related studies highlight the significant impact of time-dependent travel times on vehicle routing and scheduling. To
name a few, Malandraki and Daskin, 1992; Haghani and Jung, 2005; Chen et al., 2006; Donati et al., 2008; Figliozzi, 2012; Dabia et al.,
2013; Spliet et al., 2018; and Sun et al., 2018. Specifically, instead of using simplified customer-based graphs, some researchers
directly solve VRPs on graphs that are similar to original road networks to incorporate detailed road-network information in the
modeling process (Ben Ticha et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2017; Ben Ticha et al., 2019). Ben Ticha et al. (2018) offered a comprehensive
review on VRP studies using road-network information.
On the other hand, research on ARP with time-dependent travel times is still limited in the literature. Vidal et al. (2021) recently
offered an extensive study for the time-dependent capacitated arc routing problem (TDCARP). Based on the piecewise-constant speed
function proposed by Ichoua et al. (2003), the authors derived a closed-form representation for link arrival time functions and
developed a continuous preprocessing approach for point-to-point quickest path query. A branch-cut-and-price exact algorithm and a
hybrid genetic search-based metaheuristic were proposed for solving the TDCARP.
1.2. Contributions and overview of the paper
In this paper, we focus on model reformulation and developing exact solution approaches for RARPs in congested city trans-
portation network. We have the following observations on the modeling challenges in the related VRP and ARP literature. First, most
studies treat travel speeds on roads as constant, while the time-varying feature of transportation networks is largely simplified. A
realistic, parsimonious and mathematically rigorous model with a calibration workflow for time-dependent travel time is important for
VRP deployment and applications. Second, the system-wide impact of service vehicles in city logistics to the entire transportation
system (with other travelers and road users) has not been systematically studied. Third, in most studies, a single model was developed
for real-life RARP applications, which lacks a comprehensive investigation and comparison on the effects of rich constraints. Finally,
recognizing of the high complexity of RAPRs, most studies developed heuristics for solving real-life problems, while exact approaches
are critically needed to offer theoretical benchmarks for quantifying the solution quality and the degree of optimality. This paper aims
to offer the following contributions to the growing list of modeling and optimization literature for city logistics.
First, recognizing the potential negative impacts of service vehicles to background traffics when providing services, we system-
atically consider service vehicle operation cost and system (societal) impact of vehicle routings in city logistics so as to reduce the
system-wide congestion impact.
Second, based on the fluid queue model, a novel time-dependent travel time representation with the form of nonlinear function is
introduced. Compared to the widely adopted piecewise linear functions, the proposed nonlinear travel time function has advantages on
parsimonious form, easy calibration, and differentiability. This also leads to the analytical derivations of time-dependent system
(societal) impact of service vehicles to background traffics.
Third, three optimization models are developed from different perspectives for modeling RARPs in city logistics, in which the
impacts of problem-specific rich constraints on modeling complexity are comprehensively investigated.
Finally, with a real-life sprinkler truck routing problem (SRP) as the representative example of RARP, we develop two exact so-
lution algorithms, namely a Lagrangian relaxation based method and a branch-and-price based method which are embedded with an
enhanced parallel branch-and-bound algorithm.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the methodology for time-dependent travel time modeling
and congestion impact analysis on transportation networks. In Section 3, the SRP, as an example of RARPs on transportation networks,
146
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Fig. 1. General graphical illustration of queue evolution for a road link, adapted from Newell (2013), with a single maximum of queue length/-
waiting time reached at time t2 during congestion duration P =t3 (cid:0) t0.
is discussed in detail. In Section 4, three mathematical models are proposed for the SRP from different network modeling perspectives,
followed by a detailed comparison. Two efficient solution methods, i.e., Lagrangian relaxation and branch-and-price algorithm, are
designed in Section 5 for solving the models constructed in Section 4. Comprehensive computational experiments are conducted in
Section 6 to evaluate the proposed models and solution approaches.
2. Modeling time-dependent travel time and congestion impacts using fluid queue models with polynomial arrival rates
To calculate the travel time of a specific link, one can divide link length by travel speed, which is in turn derived from simulated/
estimated flow/density based on empirically calibrated fundamental diagrams (Greenshields et al., 1935). However, as pointed out by
Van Woensel et al. (2007), in the context of vehicle routing problems, instantaneous speed and density have to be embedded in another
set of continuum flow models (Kuhne and Michalopoulos, 1997) to characterize congestion evolution. As an alternative method,
queuing models hold the promise for modeling travel flows with the capability of offering analytical evaluation and sensitivity analysis
(Heidemann, 1996). However, the queueing-based approach is mainly based on the stochastic queueing principle with under-saturated
conditions such as M/M/1 or G/G/1 (Van Woensel et al., 2007). In this section, by adapting and extending the fluid queue model with
quadratic arrival rates proposed by Newell (2013) to represent time-dependent travel times at both link and path levels, we introduce
analytical forms that satisfy FIFO conditions and offer precise congestion impact measures during a period of oversaturation.
Compared to the widely used piecewise linear functions, the proposed method has the following three advantages: (1) a parsimonious
form, (2) an analytical expression with FIFO property, and (3) differentiable.
2.1. Time-dependent travel time
Based on free-flow speed or cut-off speed, which is more precisely defined in congestion bottleneck identification (Hale et al.,
2016), traffic states on transportation networks can be classified into two distinct classes: uncongested state and congested state. Under
uncongested states or non-peak hours, aggregated vehicle speed on each road link is relatively stable and is approximated using
free-flow speed in this paper. This assumption is consistent with the constant free-flow speed in the uncongested regime of triangular
fundamental diagram, which is adopted in the widely used cell transmission model (Daganzo, 1994). Under congested states, vehicle
travels are constrained by road capacity. Queues form when total inflow travel demand exceeds road capacity. In this case, travel time
of vehicles includes two parts: (1) free-flow travel time, and (2) time spent in the queue (travel delay). Due to the dynamics of travel
inflow demands, queue length evolves for an extended congestion period, resulting in time-dependent travel time of vehicle trips. In
this study, we mainly focus on time-dependent vehicle travel time calibration during each single congested period and use constant or
piecewise-linear travel time functions during uncongested periods. It should be noted that, to keep the differentiability of calibrated
travel time functions, one can also adopt the proposed single-period calibration method in multi-period applications to avoid con-
necting adjacent periods with constant functions. To depict potential arrival pattern changes across different periods, high-order
arrival rate functions should be applied to reduce modeling errors, but it needs additional calibration efforts (Cheng et al., 2022).
Interested readers are also referred to a recent study by Zhou et al. (2022) for a comprehensive investigation on a meso-to-macro
cross-resolution performance approach for connecting polynomial arrival queue models to volume-delay functions.
Without loss of generality, each congested road link on transportation networks is modeled as a single queuing system with a
constant service rate that equals to the maximum link discharge rate. Fig. 1 shows a graphical illustration of queue evolution for a road
link in the classical work by Newell (2013).
147
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Fig. 2. Graphic illustration of the four-step method for calibrating the key parameters in Eq. (7).
In Fig. 1(a), the blue curve and red straight line represent the arrival rate λ(t) and departure (discharge) rate μ, respectively. t0, t2,
and t3 denote the time at which queue starts to form, queue starts to dissipate, and queue disappears; t1 is the time with the highest
arrival rate. By using the second-order Taylor approximation at time t1, arrival rate λ(t) can be approximated by the following
quadratic function:
λ(t)=λ(t 1 )+λ′(t 1 )(t(cid:0) t 1 )+ 1 2 λ′′(t 1 )(t(cid:0) t 1 )2. (1)
With the observation that λ′(t1) =0, Eq. (1) can be simplified as
λ(t)=λ(t 1 )(cid:0) γ(t(cid:0) t 1 )2, (2)
where γ=(cid:0) 1
2
λ′′(t1 )(γ >0). Notice that λ(t) passes two points (t0,μ) and (t2,μ), arrival rate λ(t) can also be expressed by the following
factored form:
λ(t)=γ(t(cid:0) t 0 )(t 2 (cid:0) t)+μ. (3)
With Eq. (3), time-dependent queue length Q(t) can be derived as follows:
∫t [ ]
t (cid:0) t t(cid:0) t
Q(t)=A(t)(cid:0) D(t)= [λ(τ)(cid:0) μ]dτ=γ(t(cid:0) t 0 )2 2 2 0(cid:0) 3 0 , (4)
t0
where A(t) and D(t) denote the cumulative arrival and departure at time t, respectively. By introducing the queue clearance time t3 (i.e.,
Q(t3) =0), the following relationship between critical time points can be derived from Eq. (4). The detailed derivation process can be
found in Newell (2013) for the quadratic arrival rates and cubic arrival rates by Cheng et al. (2022).
3
t 3 =t 0 + 2 (t 2 (cid:0) t 0 ). (5)
Then, Eq. (4) can also be written as
∫t
γ
Q(t)=A(t)(cid:0) D(t)= [λ(τ)(cid:0) μ]dτ= 3 (t(cid:0) t 0 )2(t 3 (cid:0) t). (6)
t0
The discharge rate μ, queue forming time t0, and queue clearance t3 can be directly observed from field data. Thus, time-dependent
queue length Q(t) in Eq. (6) only has one inflow demand curvature parameter γ that needs to be calibrated from observed spatial queue
length or link travel times. Interested readers can refer to a recent paper by Cheng et al. (2022) for the detailed calibration process that
connects the above queuing model with the observations from a spatial queue representation. Finally, by integrating w(t) =Q(t)/μ,
time-dependent delay w(t) can be expressed as
γ
w(t)= 3μ (t(cid:0) t 0 )2(t 3 (cid:0) t). (7)
In many city logistics applications, only a single data source of observed speed vobsis available, where observation time interval t
t
can be 5 minutes or 15 minutes. The following paragraphs describe four steps for calibrating the key parameters of μ and γ in Eq. (7),
and the corresponding graphic illustration is provided in Fig. 2.
148
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
(1) Even without the flow count observations, we can still obtain an estimate of the ultimate road capacity c according to the facility
types and speed limit. The cutoff speed can be determined based on the well-established traffic fundamental diagram between
flow, density and speed, such as Greenshields model (Greenshields et al., 1935).
(2) One can determine the congestion duration P, while t0 and t3 correspond to the timestamps at which speed is dropping from or
recovering to the cutoff speed.
(3) The average discharge rate μ can be estimated from the volume-speed curve and the observed speed during the congestion
duration. A default value of μ for undersaturated links can be ultimate road capacity c.
(4) The space-mean speed vobscan be converted to the virtual waiting time w(t) in Eq. (7), and one can use nonlinear regression
t
methods to calibrate parameter γ accordingly. Alternatively, as w(t2 ) = 6 γ μ (t2 (cid:0) t0 )3, we can also quickly estimate γ based on the
lowest speed and converted highest waiting time.
It should be noted that, as derivations are based on the point queue model (Vickrey, 1963), w(t) in Eq. (7) represents the delay of a
link for vehicles arriving the downstream node (stop line) of the link at time t. With link free-flow travel time FFTT, time-dependent
travel time of a link during congested periods (denoted by LT(t)) can be calculated using Eq. (8) for vehicle leaving from the upstream
node of a link at time t.
γ
LT(t)=w(t+FFTT)+FFTT= 3μ (t+FFTT(cid:0) t 0 )2(t 3 (cid:0) t(cid:0) FFTT)+FFTT. (8)
We next derive the range of feasibility for parameter γ in Eq. (8). For a queuing system on transportation networks, the arrival and
departure rates must be positive. As we have assumed departure rate μ as a constant parameter, we also require that arrival rate λ(t)
during the analysis period be nonnegative for any t between t0 and t3. The quadratic function λ(t) has the lowest value at time t3 in the
congestion period. That is, λ(t3) ≥0 ensures λ(t) ≥0, ∀t ∈[t0,t3]. Integrating Eq. (3) and Eq. (5) yields Eq. (9):
( )
2 1 1
λ(t 3 )=γ(t 3 (cid:0) t 0 )(t 2 (cid:0) t 3 )+μ=γ(t 3 (cid:0) t 0 ) 3 t 3 + 3 t 0 (cid:0) t 3 +μ=(cid:0) 3 γP2+μ≥0, (9)
where P =t3 (cid:0) t0 represents the congestion duration.
Proposition 1. The time-dependent link travel time function LT(t) in Eq. (8) satisfies the FIFO property within the time period of
interest [t0,t3].
Proof. The FIFO property can be proved if t +LT(t) ≤t′+LT(t′) holds for any t ≤t′, t ∈[t0,t3],t′∈[t0,t3]. Alternatively, it can be
proved if dL
d
T
t
(t)≥(cid:0) 1 holds for any t ∈[t0,t3] (Carey et al., 2014). Based on the derivation of LT(t) given in Eq. (8), dL
d
T
t
( t) can be expressed
as
[ ] [ ]
dLT(t) = d 3 γ μ (t(cid:0) t 0 )2(t 3 (cid:0) t)+FFTT = d 3 γ μ (t(cid:0) t 0 )2(t 3 (cid:0) t) . (10)
dt dt dt
Let h =t (cid:0) t0,h ∈[0, P], Eq. (10) can be rewritten as
[ ]
dLT(t) = dLT(h+t 0 )dh = d 3 γ μ h2(P(cid:0) h) = γ (cid:0) 2hP(cid:0) 3h2 ) . (11)
dt dh dt dh 3μ
It is easy to observe that γ (2hP(cid:0) 3h2)is a quadratic function of h ∈[0, P] and reaches its minimum at h =P. That is,
3μ
dLT(t) γ (cid:0) ) γ (cid:0) ) γ
= 2hP(cid:0) 3h2 ≥ 2PP(cid:0) 3P2 =(cid:0) P2. (12)
dt 3μ 3μ 3μ
By utilizing the range of feasibility for γ derived in Eq. (9), it is obvious that (cid:0) 3 γ μ P2≥ (cid:0) 1, indicating dL d T t (t)≥ (cid:0) 1, ∀t∈[t0 ,t3 ]. Thus,
function LT(t) satisfying the FIFO property is proved.
On the basis of the time-dependent link travel time function, travel time derivations and FIFO property proof are further performed
on a path level. Consider two arbitrary nodes i and j on a transportation network, and there are φ paths from i to j. Take path ρ ∈{1, 2,
…, φ} as an example, the travel time of path ρ at time t (PTρ(t)) can be calculated as
∑L (cid:0) )
PT ρ (t)= LT l at l , (13)
l=1
where l ∈{1, 2, …, L} denotes the index of links in path ρ; L is the total number of links in path ρ; LTl represents the link travel time
function of the lth link in path ρ; atis the arrival time at the upstream node of the lth link if departure from node i at time t. at =t, at
l 1 l
=at l(cid:0)1 +LTl(cid:0)1 (at l(cid:0)1 )when 2 ≤l ≤L.
Proposition 2. Path travel time function PTρ(t) in Eq. (13) satisfies the FIFO property.
Proof. Consider two vehicles, v1 and v2, departing along the same path ρ at time t and time t′respectively, and t ≤t′. That is, at ≤at ′ .
1 1
′ ′ ′
As the travel time function of link 1 satisfies the FIFO property, we have at
2
=at
1
+LT1 (at
1
)≤at
2
=at
1
+LT1 (at
1
). Note that all links
149
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Fig. 3. Illustration of road link marginal delay adapted from Ghali and Smith (1995).
′ ′ ′
along path ρ satisfy the FIFO property, we can obtain at
3
=at
2
+LT2 (at
2
)≤at
3
=at
2
+LT2 (at
2
), and apply the process recursively till the
′ ′ ′
last link L, i.e., at L =at L(cid:0)1 +LTL(cid:0)1 (at L(cid:0)1 )≤at L =at L(cid:0)1 +LTL(cid:0)1 (at L(cid:0)1 ). Thanks to the FIFO property on link L, we can easily conclude that
vehicle v1 will arrive at node j earlier than vehicle v2. Thus, path travel time PTρ(t) satisfying the FIFO property is proved.
It should be noted that the derived path travel time might still have multiple local minima and maxima, but its structurally
parsimonious form could balance the tradeoff between computational tractability and the required level of details in representing real-
world traffic congestion.
2.2. Analytical form of modeling system-wide congestion impacts to background traffic
As mentioned earlier, service vehicles used in RARP applications are typically slow-moving trucks, thus may bring significant
impacts to background traffics, especially during peak hours. In this subsection, we further utilize calibrated queuing profile to
analytically measure the system impact of service vehicles, by following the approach proposed by Ghali and Smith (1995).
In Fig. 3, the blue and red solid lines denote the cumulative arrival and departure on a road link, respectively. Let us assume that
there is a service truck entering the link at time t. Note that, similar to Section 2.1, we still focus on the congested period, i.e., t0 ≤t ≤t3.
The marginal delay arising from the service truck is the blue dash area, which also equals to the grey area. The marginal delay includes
two parts w(t) and SI(t). w(t) is the delay experienced by the service truck, while SI(t) denotes the additional delay experienced on that
link by every vehicle arriving between time t and t3, due to the arrival of the service truck at time t, which is called system-wide
(societal) congestion impact in this paper. Therefore, with the derivation of w(t) in Section 2.1, SI(t) can be calculated as follows:
γ
SI(t)=t 3 (cid:0) t(cid:0) w(t)=t 3 (cid:0) t(cid:0) 3μ (t(cid:0) t 0 )2(t 3 (cid:0) t). (14)
With the consideration that service trucks typically move slower than passenger cars and use more road resources, SI(t) obtained in
Eq. (14) further is multiplied by a passenger car equivalent (PCE), i.e., SI(t) ×PCE, to measure the system impact of a service truck
entering a road link at time t.
With the link-level marginal cost formulation in Eq. (14), system-wide impact along a given path can also be recursively derived
similar to travel time derivations in Section 2.1.
3. Sprinkler truck routing: an arc routing application with rich constraints in a congested traffic network
Vehicle travels as well as the action of wind could incur serious airborne particulate matters from roads (Li et al., 2008), causing
dust emissions that bring substantial negative effects to surrounding workers and pedestrians. The dust in the air also reduces the
visibility of roads and is therefore likely to cause traffic accidents (Bhattachan et al., 2019). Street watering constitutes one of the most
common and essential services provided by municipal departments (Gambatese et al., 2001). In such a service, sprinkler trucks, also
known as water carts or water trucks, are assembled into a fleet to spray water and wash the road surface alongside streets in urban
networks. As a crucial component in street watering operation systems, sprinkler truck route design aims to determine a set of optimal
routes for a fleet of sprinkler trucks such that total cost is minimized while road cleaning tasks can be completed as required.
In this study, we use the SRP as an example to illustrate the modeling framework and solution approaches for RARPs on urban
networks. The SRP studied in this work is essentially a capacitated arc routing problem with time window (CARPTW), with the
consideration of following additional rich features:
(1) time-varying traffic conditions on urban transportation networks,
(2) turn delays at intersections,
150
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Fig. 4. An illustrative network and the route of a sprinkler truck.
(3) repeated cleaning services on certain links, and
(4) water refilling at water refilling stations.
It should be noted that the rich constraints listed above can also be generalized to many other city logistics applications. For
example, for the emerging electric vehicle routing problem in green logistics, the rich constraint (4) can be changed to charging
vehicles at charging stations, without changing the essence of the resulting problem.
For a given transportation network G =(N, L), where N and L denote the set of nodes and road links respectively, the SRP studied in
this paper is to find a set of routes for sprinkler trucks such that all cleaning tasks can be fulfilled as required and the total cost is
minimized. Each link (i, j) ∈L is associated with a cleaning task. That is, link (i, j) must be cleaned mi,j ∈Z times within its time window
[si,j, ei,j], where si,j and ei,j denote the earliest and latest service starting time, respectively. To clean link (i, j) once, a sprinkler truck will
consume wi,j unit of water. Some nodes belonging to N also serve as water refilling stations. For simplicity, in this paper, we consider
the following three assumptions on water consumption and refilling: (a) once a sprinkler truck starts to clean a road link, it must clean
the whole link. In other words, cleaning part of a link then going to refill water is not allowed; (b) a sprinkler truck is always refilled to
its maximum water tank capacity when visiting a water refilling station, and the time used for refilling is fixed, e.g., 5 minutes, no
matter how much water left before visiting a water refilling station; (c) sprinkler trucks are full of water when departing from their
origin depot. Due to the existence of assumption (a), the water consumption wi,j of each link (i, j) should not exceed the maximum water
capacity C of sprinkler trucks. In the case that wi,j is larger than C, link (i, j) will be split into multiple short links, with each of which
meeting the requirements mentioned above.
The total cost to be optimized is calculated by TOC +ω ×TSIC, where TOC and TSIC represent total operating cost and total system-
wide impact cost respectively; parameter ω is a user-defined weight of TSIC to measure the importance of societal cost in routing
solutions. The societal impact of using a specific link has been derived in Eq. (14). The total operation cost TOC consists of sprinkler
truck acquisition cost and total travel time cost. We assume all sprinkler trucks used are identical, and acquisition cost h will be applied
for each used sprinkler truck. Besides, the number of available sprinkler trucks is unlimited. The travel time cost of each sprinkler truck
equals to the time difference between leaving depot and returning back to the depot, which further consists of four parts: cleaning time,
deadheading time, waiting time, and water refilling time. Deadheading means a sprinkler truck traverses a road link without cleaning
the link. It may occur in two situations: (a) the link does not need to clean or has been cleaned; (b) a sprinkler has used up water and is
heading to a water refilling station. For each road link, its time-dependent deadheading time DT(t) and cleaning time CT(t) are
calculated as follows:
DT(t)=w(t)+LL/v d , (15)
CT(t)=max[DT(t),LL/v c ], (16)
where w(t) is time-dependent link delay derived in Eq. (7); LL represent the length of the link, vd and vc denote the maximum speed of
151
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Fig. 5. A simple network and its corresponding time-expanded network.
Fig. 6. A simple network and its corresponding time-expanded networks in SRP.
sprinkler trucks in the deadheading mode and cleaning mode respectively. Waiting time represents the time gap between the arrival
time and service starting time of a sprinkler on links (due to time window), rather than the waiting time at intersections caused by
control delay. Note that we do not allow sprinkler trucks to wait if they do not have to, e.g., keep staying at a link after cleaning service
is complete.
Fig. 4 shows an illustrative example with a simple network and a route of a sprinkler truck. The network consists of 17 nodes
(intersections) indexed from 0 to 16. The depot is located at node 0, and two water refilling stations are located at node 11 and 12
respectively. The orange line denotes an example route, which is composed of solid lines (truck in cleaning mode) and dash lines (truck
in deadheading mode). In Fig. 4, the sprinkler truck starts from depot node 0, cleans links (0,4), (4,1), (2,5), (5,8), refills water at node
11, cleans links (16,15), (15,14), (14,13), (13,7), (7,4), (4,0), and returns back to depot node 0.
4. Mathematical formulations of the optimization problem
In this section, three models are developed for the proposed SRP from different perspectives. Specifically, a discretized time-
expanded network based arc routing model M1 in Section 4.1, an arc-based node routing model M2 in Section 4.2, and a path-
based node routing model M3 in Section 4.3. Section 4.4 offers a comprehensive comparison.
152
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Table 2
Notations used in model M1-TEN.
Symbols Definition
Indices
i, j Index of nodes in graph GI
t, t′ Index of time intervals
f Index of sprinkler trucks
Sets
LI Set of links in graph GI
F Set of sprinkler trucks
V Set of vertexes in graph GST
A Set of arcs in graph GST
CAi,j Cleaning arc set associated with link (i,j)∈LI
RA Set of water refilling arcs in graph GST
Parameters
oST (dST ) Origin (destination) vertex of sprinkler trucks in graph GST
cti,j, t, t′ Travel time cost of arc (i, j, t, t′) ∈A
cgi,j, t, t′ System impact cost of arc (i, j, t, t′) ∈A
ci,j, t, t′ General cost of arc (i, j, t, t′) ∈A
mi,j Number of cleaning requests of link (i, j) in graph GI
wi,j, t, t′ Water consumption of arc (i, j, t, t′) ∈A
C Water tank capacity of sprinkler trucks
r Water refilling time
h Sprinkler truck acquisition cost
Variables
xf i,j,t,t′ Binary variable. xf i,j,t,t′ =1 if sprinkler f uses arc (i, j, t, t′); otherwise, xf i,j,t,t′ =0
qf
i,t
Water level of sprinkler f at vertex (i, t)
4.1. An arc routing model based on time-expanded network (model M1-TEN)
A standard VRP or ARP typically assumes, each customer must be served once and exactly once. Benefitting from the assumption,
vehicle states (arrival time, cumulative loads) can be associated with customers, thus a concise physical network based model can be
built (Cordeau, 2006). However, in the SRP considered in this study, some road links may be required to be cleaned multiple times,
implying a road link may be serviced multiple times by sprinkler trucks, which makes vehicle states intractable if associating them with
physical networks. As a result, we adopt a time-expanded network based modeling approach. In the literature, the time-expanded
network based modeling approach has been successfully applied in solving a wide range of transportation supply-side optimization
problems, e.g., dynamic traffic assignment (Lu et al., 2016), VRP (Yao et al., 2019), passenger flow state estimation (Shang et al.,
2019), and train timetabling problem (Zhang et al., 2019). By extending a physical network to a time-expanded network, nodes and
road links in the original physical network are extended to vertexes and arcs with an extra time dimension. With the extended time
dimension, the multiple-services requirements can be systematically modelled as well as time-dependent travel times. To enable model
M1 to accommodate the need of turn delay modeling, with the intersection expansion process similar to the approach discussed by
Kirby and Potts (1969), Ziliaskopoulos and Mahmassani (1996), and Pallottino and Scutella (1998), a new network GI =(NI ,LI )is
first constructed from the network G described in Section 3.
For a time-expanded network GST from GI, vertex (i, t) ∈V is constructed from physical node i∈NI, where t denotes time. Arc (i,
j, t, t′) ∈A represents a space-time traveling activity from vertex (i, t) to vertex (j, t′). As the time dimension is continuous, we evenly
discretize the entire planning horizon [0, T] into short time intervals, e.g., 10 seconds, so that the number of vertexes and arcs is finite.
As a result, t and t′both represent the indices of discretized time intervals. We use χ ={0, 1, 2, …, s} to denote the set of indices of
discretized time intervals, where s is the index of the last time interval. Arcs in a time-expanded network consist of two categories:
traveling arc (i, j, t, t′) and waiting arc (i, i, t, t +1). A traveling arc (i, j, t, t′) means a vehicle enters link (i,j)∈LI at time t and leaves at
time t′, and t′(cid:0) t equals the travel time of the link at time t. Note that link (i, j) can either be a road link or a movement link in network
GI. A waiting arc (i, i, t, t +1) corresponds to the waiting activity of a vehicle at node i∈NI for one time interval. Waiting arcs are
used when a sprinkler truck arrives at a road link earlier than the link’s earliest service starting time. Fig. 5 depicts a simple three-node
network with its corresponding time-expanded network, where the travel time of link (1, 2) and link (2, 3) are 1 and 2, respectively.
With the basic concepts introduced above, we present the time-expanded network built for the SRP in Fig. 6, with the following
problem-specific highlights:
(1) Cleaning arc and deadheading arc: When a sprinkler moves on a road link, it has two possible modes, i.e., cleaning mode and
deadheading mode. In the cleaning mode, the sprinkler truck cleans the link when traveling on it, but not in the deadheading
mode. Note that sprinkler trucks typically have different speeds in the cleaning mode and deadheading mode. Therefore, it is
necessary to build cleaning arcs (Fig. 6(a)) and deadheading arcs (Fig. 6(b)) with different travel times for each physical link.
For a cleaning arc (i, j, t, t′) in Fig. 6(a), t′(cid:0) t equals to cleaning time on link (i, j); for a deadheading arc arc (i, j, t, t′) in Fig. 6(b),
t′(cid:0) t equals to deadheading time on link (i, j). Another difference between cleaning arcs and deadheading arcs is about water
153
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
consumption. If we use wi,j, t, t to denote the water consumption of arc (i, j, t, t′), wi,j, t, t′ =wi,j if the arc is a cleaning arc;
otherwise, wi,j, t, t′=0.
(2) Time-dependent travel time: For a deadheading arc (i, j, t, t′), t′(cid:0) t equals to DT(t) in Eq. (15); for a cleaning arc (i, j, t, t′), t′(cid:0) t
equals to CT(t) in Eq. (16). One can observe that each traveling arc (including deadheading arc and cleaning arc) in Fig. 6 is
associated with its own travel time, which can be viewed as a fine discretized approximation of continuous functions in Eqs. (15)
and (16).
(3) Service time window: In the SRP, each link is associated with a service time window, within which cleaning services must be
started. In other words, for a specific link, cleaning arcs outside its service time window are not allowed to use. We can easily
impose this constraint by deleting cleaning arcs outside service time windows when building a time-expanded network. For
example, in Fig. 6(a), the service time window of link (1, 2) is [2, 6], then the arcs with a red cross will be deleted.
(4) Waiting arc: According to the problem description in Section 3, waiting is only allowed when a sprinkler truck arrives earlier
than link service starting time. Therefore, compared with the illustrative example in Fig. 5, tighter restrictions are considered in
building waiting arcs for the SRP to avoid invalid waiting. First, waiting arcs are only built for inbound nodes of road links that
need cleaning services. Second, waiting arcs with entering time later than the corresponding link’s service starting time will not
be generated. For road link (1, 2) with time window [2, 6] in Fig. 6, waiting arcs (1, 1, t, t +1) are only constructed for t =0, 1.
(5) Water refilling arc: Water refilling arcs (i, i, t, t +r) are built on each water refilling station i, where r denotes the time required to
refill a sprinkler truck.
(6) Origin and destination: In the newly generated time-expanded network, vertex oST (o,0)and dST (d,s)will serve as the origin
and destination vertex of sprinkler trucks, where o and d denote the origin node and destination node in network GI; s is the
index of the last discretized time interval in the whole planning horizon. Waiting arcs on destination d are constructed to ensure
that sprinkler trucks are able to return back to and keep staying at the destination depot after finishing cleaning tasks.
To reduce the size of time-expanded networks and simplify the subsequent optimization model, we can further remove vertexes and
arcs outside the space-time prism between the origin vertex oST and destination vertex dST . A space-time prism is an envelope that
covers all possible paths between two space-time vertexes. Interested readers are referred to Miller (2005) and Tong et al. (2015).
With the preparation of intersection expansion and time-expanded network construction, we now present the arc routing
formulation on time-expanded network (model M1-TEN) for the proposed SRP. Notations are summarized in Table 2.
Model M1-TEN:
Objective function
∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑
minZ 1 = ct i,j,t,t′xf i,j,t,t′ +h xf o,j,0,t′ +ω cg i,j,t,t′xf i,j,t,t′ (17)
f∈F(i,j,t,t′)∈A f∈F(j,t′):(o,j,0,t′)∈A f∈F(i,j,t,t′)∈A
Subject to:
Flow balance constraint:
/
∑ ∑
xf i,j,t,t′ = xf j,i,t′,t , ∀f ∈F,(i,t)∈V {o ST ,d ST } (18)
(j,t′):(i,j,t,t′)∈A (j,t′):(j,i,t′,t)∈A
Cleaning request satisfaction constraint:
∑ ∑
xf i,j,t,t′ =m i,j , ∀(i,j)∈L I (19)
f∈F(i,j,t,t′)∈CAi,j
Sprinkler truck water level updating constraint:
(cid:0) ) /
qf j,t′ ≤qf i,t (cid:0) w i,j,t,t′xf i,j,t,t′ +C 1(cid:0) xf i,j,t,t′ , ∀f ∈F,(i,j,t,t′)∈A RA (20)
Decision variables:
xf ∈{0,1}, ∀f ∈F,(i,j,t,t′)∈A
i,j,t,t′
0≤qf i,t ≤C, ∀f ∈F,(i,t)∈V (21)
The objective function in Eq. (17) minimizes the total cost to complete cleaning tasks, which includes three parts: travel time cost
∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑
f∈F(i,j,t,t ′)∈A
ct i,j,t,t ′xf i,j,t,t′, vehicle acquisition cost h
f∈F(j,t ′):(o,j,0,t ′)∈A
xf i,j,t,t′, and system impact cost ω
f∈F(i,j,t,t ′)∈A
cg i,j,t,t ′xf i,j,t,t′. The travel time cost cti,
j, t, t′of arc (i, j, t, t′) equals to t′(cid:0) t for all arcs in set A, except waiting ∑ arcs b ∑ uilt at sprinkler destination node d. We let the cost of waiting
arcs at node d equal to 0 (i.e., ci,i, t, t +1 =0 if i =d). Expression
f∈F(j,t ′):(o,j,0,t ′)∈A
xf i,j,t,t′ denotes the number of sprinkler trucks used. By
integrating three types of coefficient of each xf
i,j,t,t
′, Eq. (17) can be simplified as
∑ ∑
minZ 1 = c i,j,t,t′xf i,j,t,t′ , (22)
f∈F(i,j,t,t′)∈A
154
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Table 3
Additional notations used in the node routing model.
Symbols Definition
Indices
i, j Index of nodes in graph GN
ρ Index of edges between each pair of nodes in graph GN
p Index of time slots
Sets
NN Set of nodes in graph GN
Ns N Set of service nodes in graph GN
Nw N Set of water refilling stations in graph GN
EN Set of edges in graph GN
PN Set of time slots
Parameters
φ Number of edges between each pair of nodes in graph GN
τ i,p Service time of node i∈NN in slot p
τ i,j, ρ, p Travel time of edge (i,j,ρ)∈EN in slot p
cgi,p Congestion impact of serving node i∈NN in slot p
cgi,j, ρ, p Congestion impact of using edge (i,j,ρ)∈EN in slot p
wi Water consumption of node i∈NN
si(ei) The earliest (latest) service starting time of node i∈NN
Ti,p Ending time of slot p for node i
Variables
xi,j, ρ, p Binary variable. xi,j, ρ, p =1 if a sprinkler uses edge (i, j, ρ) in slot p; otherwise, xi,j, ρ, p =0
yi,p Binary variable. yi,p =1 if cleaning service starts on node i in slot p; otherwise, yi,p =0
qi Water level of a sprinkler at node i
ti d Departure time of a sprinkler from node i
ti s Service starting time of node i
where ci,j, t, t′represents the general cost of arc (i, j, t, t′), consisting of travel time cost, vehicle acquisition cost, and system impact cost.
Constraint (18) guarantees that the incoming flow equals to outgoing flow on vertexes. Note that we do not impose this constraint on
the origin vertex oST and destination vertex dST . Constraint (19) makes sure that links are cleaned as requested, while constraint
(20) is used to update the water level of sprinkler trucks. Finally, constraint (21) specifies decision variables with their domains.
Specifically, xf i,j,t,t′ are binary variables, and qf i,t are positive continuous variables with an upper bound of C, where C represents the
water tank capacity of sprinkler trucks.
4.2. Graph transformation and a slot-based time discretization node routing model (model M2-STD)
The adoption of intersection expansion and time-expanded networks can allow the consideration of various rich constraints into the
generated network, contributing to a concise form of model M1-TEN. Yet, additional movement links created at intersections and high-
dimension time-expanded networks significantly increase the size of model M1-TEN, making it extremely challenging to solve on large-
scale instances. In this section, we further propose a node routing model by converting the original ARP to a node routing problem
(NRP). Solving an ARP by converting it to an NRP was first proposed by Pearn et al. (1987) and was adopted and improved by Longo
et al. (2006). The core idea behind the conversion process is treating arcs to be served as activity nodes in the NRP and building virtual
edges to connect each pair of the resulting nodes based on the shortest paths in the original network.
In the proposed SRP, due to the consideration of additional rich features, there are three major challenges during the conversion
process. First, on a congested urban transportation network with time-varying traffic conditions, the shortest path (in terms of travel
time) between two nodes changes during the day. Second, cost of a path consists of travel time cost and system impact cost, therefore a
shortest path with the least travel time between two activity nodes does not necessarily correspond to the best path with the least total
cost. Third, due to the existence of service time window, even the best path with the least total cost does not guarantee an optimal
solution. Consider two paths (e.g., path 1 and path 2) between a pair of activity nodes, where path 1 has a lower total cost than path 2.
However, path 1 takes longer travel time, causing some future service nodes not to be served from path 1 due to time windows.
Adopting path 1 with a lower total cost may need additional vehicles to visit these unserved service nodes, which could result in a
suboptimal routing solution. To address this issue, we keep φ paths between each pair of activity nodes in the resulting NRP. The details
of the transformation process are illustrated in Appendix A.
Due to the adoption of nonlinear functions for representing time-varying traffic conditions in the converted graph GN, i.e., τ i(t), τ i,j,
ρ(t), cgi(t), and cgi,j, ρ(t), one can expect that an optimization model built on GN is highly nonconvex and extremely hard to solve (see
Appendix B). Therefore, in model M2-STD, nonlinear functions are approximated by piecewise-constant functions. That is, the entire
planning time horizon [0, T] is split into multiple time slots with the same duration, e.g., 10 minutes, and nonlinear functions are
approximated by constants within each slot. Model M2-STD is presented as follows, where notations are illustrated in Table 3.
Model M2-STD:
Objective function
155
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
( )
∑ ∑ ∑ ∑
minZ 2 = t d d f +h x oN,j,ρ,p +ω cg i,j,ρ,p x i,j,ρ,p + cg i,p y i,p (23)
f∈F N (j,ρ):(oN,j,ρ)∈EN,p∈PN (i,j,ρ)∈EN,p∈PN i∈NN,p∈PN
Subject to:
Cleaning request satisfaction constraint:
∑ ∑
x j,i,ρ,p =1, ∀i∈N N s (24)
(j,ρ):(j,i,ρ)∈ENp∈PN
Sprinkler truck spatial route constraint:
∑ ∑ ∑ ∑
x j,i,ρ,p = x i,j,ρ,p ,∀i∈N N s ∪N N w (25)
(j,ρ):(j,i,ρ)∈ENp∈PN (j,ρ):(i,j,ρ)∈ENp∈PN
∑ ∑ { }
x j,i,ρ,p ≤1, ∀i∈N N w ∪ d N f |f ∈F (26)
(j,ρ):(j,i,ρ)∈ENp∈PN
Sprinkler truck temporal route constraint:
t o d N =0 (27)
(cid:0) )
t j s≥t i d+τ i,j,ρ,p +M x i,j,ρ,p (cid:0) 1 , ∀(i,j,ρ)∈E N ,∀p∈P N (28)
t i d≥t i s+τ i,p y i,p , ∀i∈N N ,∀p∈P N (29)
∑
y i,p =1, ∀i∈N N (30)
p∈PN
(cid:0) )
T p(cid:0)1 x i,j,ρ,p ≤t i d<T p +M 1(cid:0) x i,j,ρ,p , ∀(i,j,ρ)∈E N ,∀p∈P N (31)
(cid:0) )
T p(cid:0)1 y i,p ≤t i s<T p +M 1(cid:0) y i,p , ∀i∈N N ,∀p∈P N (32)
Time window constraint:
s i ≤t i s≤e i , ∀i∈N N (33)
Sprinkler truck water level updating constraint:
q oN =C (34)
(cid:0) ) { }
q j ≤q i (cid:0) x i,j,ρ,p w j +C 1(cid:0) x i,j,ρ,p , ∀(i,j,ρ)∈ E N |i∈N N s ,∀p∈P N (35)
{ }
q j ≤C(cid:0) x i,j,ρ,p w j , ∀(i,j,ρ)∈ E N |i∈N N w ∪{o N } ,∀p∈P N (36)
Decision variables:
x i,j,ρ,p ∈{0,1}, ∀(i,j,ρ)∈E N ,∀p∈P N
y i,p ∈{0,1}, ∀i∈N N ,∀p∈P N
0≤q i ≤C, t i d≥0, t i s≥0, ∀i∈N N (37)
The objective function in Eq. (23) aims to minimize the total cost, where oN represents the origin node of sprinkler trucks in graph
GN, and df N denotes the copy of destination node dN for sprinkler f in graph GN. By creating a dummy copy df N of the destination depot
for each sprinkler truck f, the arrival time of sprinkler truck f at the destination depot df N is the time used by sprinkler truck f. Note that
since service time at destination depots is zero, arrival times and departure times at destination depots are the same, thus we can use
departure time td in the objective function to avoid defining extra variables. Constraint (24) ensures that each service node is serviced
df
N
exactly once. Constraint (25), (26) and Eqs. (27)–(32) formulate the spatial and temporal route constraints of sprinkler trucks,
respectively. In constraint (29), τ i,p denotes the service time of node i if service starts in time slot p. For service nodes, τ i,p equals to the
cleaning time of corresponding road links in slot p. For water refilling stations and depot nodes, τ i,p equals to the water refilling time
and zero, respectively. Constraint (33) makes sure that cleaning services start within preset time windows. Constraints (34)–(36) are
used to track the water level updating of sprinkler trucks. Finally, constraint (37) specifies decision variables and their domains used in
model M2-STD.
In addition to the essential constraints (24)–(37), two sets of constraints are further constructed below to tighten the linear
relaxation of model M2-STD. Specifically, constraint (38) ensures that at least one sprinkler is needed to complete cleaning tasks. Note
156
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Table 4
Parameters of polynomial travel time functions.
Link t0 t3 γ μ FFTT Link travel time function
1-2 3 16 15 1200 1.36 LT(t)=
3 ×
15
1200
(t(cid:0) 3)2(16(cid:0) t)+1.36
2-3 4 18 12 1000 1.54 LT(t)=
3 ×
12
1000
(t(cid:0) 4)2(18(cid:0) t)+1.54
that, as sprinkler trucks are allowed to refill water during their trips, we cannot calculate the minimum number of sprinkler trucks
using total water needed divided by water tank capacity of sprinkler trucks. Although constraint (38) seems to be very loose, it does
serve as the lower bound of many instances in the numerical experiment section. Constraint (39) is used to break the symmetry of
model M2-STD.
∑
x oN,j,ρ,p ≥1 (38)
(j,ρ):(oN,j,ρ)∈EN,p∈PN
t d d N 1 ≤t d d N 2 ≤…≤t d d N |F|(cid:0)1 ≤t d d N |F| (39)
4.3. Path-based set partition formulation with continuous-time representation (model M3-CTR)
In this section, we further propose a path-based model (set partition formulation) on the graph GN constructed in Appendix A.
Instead of time discretization, the original continuous polynomial form of service time function and travel time function is adopted. As
pointed by Boland et al. (2017), the granularity of the discretization has an impact on both candidate solutions and the computational
tractability. Let r ∈Ω denote a feasible sprinkler truck route, where Ω represents the set of all feasible routes. A feasible route r should
satisfy constraints (B3–B12) in Appendix B. The set partition formulation can be expressed as follows:
Model M3-CTR:
Objective function
∑
minZ 3 = c r θ r (40)
r∈Ω
Subject to:
Cleaning request satisfaction constraint:
∑
α i,r θ r =1, ∀i∈N N s (41)
r∈Ω
Decision variables:
θ r ∈{0,1}, ∀r∈Ω (42)
The objective function Eq. (40) minimizes the cost of all selected routes, where θ r is a binary variable indicating whether route r is
chosen in a solution or not; cr is the cost of route r, including operation cost and system impact. Constraint (41) states that all service
nodes are serviced once, where α i,r is a mapping coefficient between service node i and route r (number of times that route r passes
activity node i).
4.4. Model comparison in terms of time-varying travel time representation and model formulation
An illustrative example with two consecutive links is first used to show the difference in time-dependent travel time modeling
among the three models. Table 4 presents the sample values for the parameters of polynomial travel time functions proposed in Section
2. The time unit in this example is minute.
Fig. 7 shows the travel time functions (blue lines) used in the three models, among which piecewise-constant functions depicted in
Fig. 7(b) correspond to the first method in Table 1, while functions in Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 7(c) are the two proposed approaches in this
study. For model M1-TEN, the time dimension is discretized into 0.2-minute time intervals. Therefore, both link travel times and node
arrival (departure) times are approximated with a 0.2-minute resolution. For model M2-STD, the entire time horizon is split into four 5-
minute slots, and travel times remain constant in each slot. For model M3-CTR, the original polynomial form of travel time functions is
used.
In Table 5, a comprehensive summary of the three proposed models is further provided. For the formulation with continuous-time
representation M3-CTR, it is important to use a well-behaved travel time function satisfying the FIFO property; otherwise, unnecessary
and unrealistic waiting could be observed from the final solutions. In Section 6, extensive numerical experiments will be performed to
examine the computational efficiency of the three models.
157
158
TransportationResearchPartB166(2022)143–182 Fig. 7. An illustrative example of time-dependent travel time modeling in three models, ranging from high-fidelity discretization M1-TEN, semi-dynamic slot-based discretization M2-STD and
continuous-time representation M3-CTR.
J.
Lu
et
al.
159
TransportationResearchPartB166(2022)143–182
Table 5
Comparisons among the three proposed models.
Model M1-TEN Model M2-STD Model M3-CTR
Model type Arc routing model (MILP) Arc-based node routing model (MILP) Path-based node routing model (MILP)
Network type Time-expanded networks from physical networks Activity node-based networks from physical networks
Rich constraint (1) Embedded in arcs; approximated with a fine resolution Piecewise-constant approximation; extra slot dimension Directly using polynomial travel time
handling TV functions for an entire congestion
period
(2) Intersection expansion Embedded in edges between activity nodes
TD
(3) Allow multiple visits along extra time dimension Dummy activity nodes Dynamically considered when
RS constructing a path
(4) Water refilling arcs Dummy water refilling nodes
WR
Main decision variables xf i,j,t,t′ ∈{0,1}, ∀f ∈F, (i, j, t, t′) ∈A x
yi
i
,
,
p
j,
∈
p ∈
{0
{
,
0
1
,
}
1
,
}
∀
,
i
∀
∈
(i,
N
j)
N
∈
,∀
E
p
N
∈
,∀
P
p
N
∈PN θ r ∈{0, 1}, ∀r ∈Ω
Side constraints Flow balance constraint; Sprinkler spatial route constraint; Cleaning request satisfaction constraint
Cleaning request satisfaction constraint; Sprinkler temporal route constraint;
Sprinkler truck water level updating constraint Cleaning request satisfaction constraint;
Time window constraint;
Sprinkler truck water level updating constraint
Features Embed various rich constraints into time-expanded networks, Turn delays are considered in the activity node-based graph construction stage, without increasing the complexity of
resulting in a concise model formulation; subsequent optimization models
Fine time-dependent travel time modeling Less number of decision variables compared with the other two models Only one set of side constraint
Challenges A large number of additional decision variables are introduced Time-dependent travel times are approximated with piecewise-constant functions For large-scale instances, feasible paths
due to intersection expansion and the use of time-expanded and modeled with an additional slot dimension which increases the model size cannot be explicitly numerated.
network (complexity)
Notes: MILP – mixed integer linear programming, TV - time-varying traffic conditions on urban transportation networks, TD - turning delays at intersections, RS - repeated cleaning services on certain
links, WR - water refilling at water refilling stations.
J.
Lu
et
al.
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
5. Exact solution methods
The models developed in Section 4 are all (mixed) integrated linear programming models and theoretically solvable using existing
solvers such as Gurobi and CPLEX. While, in real-life applications, the size of resulting models could be extremely large, making it hard
to obtain desirable solutions from solvers within a reasonable time. In this section, recognizing the mathematical characteristics of
each proposed model, we develop two exact solution methods for efficiently solving these models. Specifically, a Lagrangian relaxation
(LR) based method is proposed for solving model M1-TEN, while a branch-and-price (BnP) based approach is proposed for solving
model M3-CTR.
5.1. Lagrangian relaxation
The concise form of model M1-TEN provides the possibility of using decomposition techniques to obtain good solutions quickly.
Model M1-TEN consists of three sets of side constraints, among which only cleaning request satisfaction constraint (19) couples
different sprinkler trucks. If constraint (19) is relaxed, model M1 can be decomposed into multiple easier sprinkler-specific sub-
problems, which can be solved independently. In this work, we propose a LR-based method for solving model M1-TEN.
Under the LR framework, coupling constraint (19) is relaxed, and the violation is penalized in objective function Eq. (17) using
Lagrangian multipliers λ i,j. The relaxed problem is
Objective function
⎛ ⎞
∑ ∑ ∑
minZ 4 =Z 1 + λ i,j ⎝ xf i,j,t,t′ (cid:0) m i,j ⎠ (43)
(i,j)∈LI f∈F(i,j,t,t′)∈CAi,j
Subject to:
(18), (20), (21).
By reorganizing the coefficients of decision variable xf i,j,t,t′, the objective function Eq. (43) can be further simplified to Eq. (44).
Given the value of λ i,j, the relaxed problem needs to find the least cost shortest path on the discretized time-expanded network with
′
modified arc cost c i,j,t,t′ for each sprinkler truck, which can be exactly solved by the dynamic programming approach (Mahmoudi and
Zhou, 2016; Yao et al., 2019).
∑ ∑ ∑
minZ 4 = c′ i,j,t,t′ ,xf i,j,t,t′ (cid:0) λ i,j m i,j (44)
f∈F(i,j,t,t′)∈A (i,j)∈LI
We adopt the classical sub-gradient method to update the values of Lagrangian multipliers λ i,j using Eq. (45) and Eq. (46), where λk i,j
and αk denote the value of λ i,j and step length at iteration k, respectively. It should be noted that, as constraint (19) is an equality
constraint, Lagrangian multipliers can be positive, negative, or 0. A positive Lagrangian multiplier means an additional penalty when
serving the corresponding arc, while a negative value means an additional bonus. Lagrangian iteration stops when constraint (19) is
satisfied on all links, i.e., no Lagrangian multipliers updating in Eq. (45).
⎛ ⎞
∑ ∑
λk i, + j 1=λk i,j +αk⎝ xf i,j,t,t′ (cid:0) m i,j ⎠ (45)
f∈F(i,j,t,t′)∈CAi,j
/
αk=1 (k+1) (46)
A detailed illustration of the Lagrangian relaxation based solution process is presented in Appendix C. Interested readers are also
referred to Zhang et al. (2019) and Yao et al. (2019) for efficiently solving a model with coupling constraints on time-expanded
networks under a dual decomposition framework using alternating direction method of multipliers.
5.2. Branch and price algorithm
For model M3-CTR, the number of feasible routes in set Ω can be extremely large in large-scale problems, making it nearly
impossible to enumerate all routes and solve the resulting model using existing solvers. In this section, we further propose a Branch and
Price (BnP)-based exact solution approach to solve model M3-CTR. The proposed BnP algorithm consists of two modules, i.e., column
generation (CG) and branch-and-bound (BnB). Model M3-CTR is denoted as the master problem (MP), then we need to use CG module
to solve the linear master problem (LMP), while the BnB module is needed to obtain integer solutions based on the results from the CG
module. The LMP is the same as MP except the domain of decision variables. In LMP, we relax the integer requirement of decision
variable θ r, i.e., 0 ≤θ r ≤1. Due to the existence of constraint (41), we can further simplify the domain constraint 0 ≤θ r ≤1 to θ r ≥0.
Column generation
The LMP is still hard to solve due to the large size of route set Ω. Therefore, instead of directly solving the LMP, we iteratively solve
its corresponding restricted linear master problem (RLMP), whose route set Ω′ only contains part of feasible routes and is extended
with new routes as needed. The RLMP is presented as follows:
160
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Algorithm 1
Label extension procedure.
Input: label l ={node, Rc,Rt,Rw,prev, Φ}, node service time function τ i(t), edge travel time function τ i,j, ρ(t), system impact functions cgi(t) and cgi,j, ρ(t)
Output: new label l′on node j
1: label l′=null
2: if j∕∈Φ and Rw (cid:0) wj ≥0 then
3: arrival time at node j: atj =Rt +τ i(Rt) +τ i,j, ρ(Rt +τ i(Rt))
4: if atj ≤ej then
5: the earliest service starting time at node j: R′ t =max(atj ,sj )
6: the earliest time to return back to the depot after visiting node j:
atdN =R ′ t +τ j (R ′ t )+m ρ i ′ n{τ j,dN,ρ′(R ′ t +τ j (R ′ t ))}
7: if atdN ≤edN then
8: R′
t
={ Rc
R
+
c
R
+
′ t
R
(cid:0)
′ t
R
(cid:0)
t
R
+
t
c
+
gi,
c
j,
g
ρ
i
(
,j
R
,ρ
t
(
+
Rt
τ
+
i (R
τ i
t
(
)
R
)
t
+
))
c
+
gi (
c
R
gi
t
(
)
R
(cid:0)
t )
π j i
i
f
fj
j
∕∈
∈
N
Ns N
s N
9: R′
w
={
Rw
C
(cid:0) wj
i
i
f
f
j
j
∈
∕∈
N
N
w N
w N
10: prev′ =l
11: Φ′={ Φ∩V j ifj∈Nw N
Φ∩V j ∪{j} ifj∕∈Nw N
12: label l ′ ={j,R ′ c ,R ′ t ,R ′ w ,prev ′,Φ′}
13: return label l′
Objective function
∑
minZ 5 = c r θ r (47)
r∈Ω′
Subject to:
Cleaning request satisfaction constraint:
∑
α i,r θ r =1, ∀i∈N N s (48)
r∈Ω′
Decision variables:
θ r ≥0, ∀r∈Ω′ (49)
In this paper, the initial routes in set Ω′are generated by assigning one sprinkler for each service node. Note that, when generating
initial routes, if a node cannot be serviced due to the violation of time window constraint or water consumption constraint, the original
problem is then infeasible. The route set Ω′in RLMP is extended by solving the so-called pricing problem, during which routes with
negative reduced cost are added into set Ω′.
(a) Formulation of the pricing problem
The pricing problem is formulated as follows:
Objective function
( )
∑ (cid:0) ) ∑ ( ) ∑
minZ 5 =h+t d d N +ω cg i,j,ρ t i d x i,j,ρ + cg j t j s x i,j,ρ (cid:0) x i,j,ρ π j (50)
(i,j,ρ)∈EN (i,j,ρ)∈EN (i,j,ρ)∈EN:j∈N
N
s
Subject to: constraints B3–B12 in Appendix B.
Objective function Eq. (50) minimizes the reduced cost of a feasible route, where π j is the reduced cost associated with node j.
Essentially, the optimization problem presented above is an elementary shortest path problem with resource constraint (ESPPRC).
(b) Dynamic programming algorithm for the pricing problem
Finding an elementary shortest path with resource constraint in a network is an NP-hard problem. Therefore, finding the exact
solution for the aforementioned pricing problem may be extremely time-consuming in large-scale instances. In the literature, to reduce
the computational complexity of the pricing problem, following the pioneering work by Christofides et al. (1981), researchers started
to develop efficient algorithms for finding non-elementary shortest paths with resource constraint through relaxing the elementary
requirement, i.e., allowing visiting a node multiple times (Irnich and Villeneuve, 2006; Baldacci et al., 2011; Martinelli et al., 2014).
The use of non-elementary shortest paths will not affect finding the optimal solution of the original problem but will weaken its linear
relaxations. In this paper, we adopt the dynamic programming ng-route algorithm proposed by Martinelli et al. (2014) with some
modifications. Specifically, in Martinelli et al. (2014), a vehicle only needs to collect goods during its trip, therefore the load of a
161
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Algorithm 2
Dynamic programming ng-route algorithm.
Input: node-based graph GN, ng-set V i for each node i∈NN
Output: the best ng-route
1: create a root label l0 ={oN,h,0,C,null,{oN}}
2: U ←{l0 }
3: while U ∕=∅ do
4: choose a label l with the minimum service starting time from U, and delete l from U
5: for j∈NN do
6: for ρ:=1,2,…,φ do
7: if label l can be extended to node j via edge ρ (feasibility checking in Algorithm 1) then
8: create a new label l′on node j from label l
9: insertLabel ← true
10: for label l′′∈U on node j do
11: if label l′′dominates l′then
12: insertLabel ← false
13: break
14: else if label l′dominates l′′then
15: delete l′′
16: if insertLabel then
17: U ←U ∪{l′}
18: best label l* ← the label with the least reduced cost on the destination depot node
19: retrieving the best route from label l*
20: return the best route
vehicle keeps increasing along with its trip. As a result, a two-dimension matrix with vehicle load as one axis can be created, and the
dynamic programming process can be performed in the order of vehicle load increasing. However, in the SRP considered in this work,
sprinkler trucks are allowed to refill water during their trips, hence the water level changes on sprinkler trucks are not monotonous
anymore. Another challenge is that demands are assumed to be discrete in Martinelli et al. (2014), while it is continuous in the
proposed SRP, thus creating a matrix with sprinkler water level as an axis is impossible.
We first introduce the three key components of a dynamic programming algorithm, including state (label) definition, extension
rule, and dominance rule, followed by the modified ng-route algorithm developed in this paper.
Label definition. Labels used in the pricing problem have the following form: l ={node, Rc,Rt,Rw,prev, Φ}, where node means current
node label l is on; Rc, Rt, Rw denotes the reduced cost, the actual service starting time, and the water level of the sprinkler at current
node, respectively; prev stands for the previous label of label l; Φ represents the set of forbidden nodes that are not allowed to extend
from label l, which will be introduced in the extension rule below.
Extension rule. The process of extending current label l to node j via edge ρ is presented in Algorithm 1. In Algorithm 1, line 2-4 check
if node j is reachable from current node i; line 7 checks if the destination depot is reachable after visiting node j. Line 12 creates a new
label l′on node j from label l via edge ρ. Specifically, the ng-set V j of node j is used when updating forbidden set Φ′. For each node i, a
ng-set V i is predefined which includes a certain number of nearest nodes of i (including itself). A label on node i only includes the
intersection of visited nodes and V i into its forbidden set Φ, resulting in the possibility of forming cycles. Generally, the larger the ng-
sets are, the less likely to contain cycles in routes, and also closer to the original ESPPRC (harder to solve). Water refilling stations will
also not be put into forbidden sets as they are always allowed to revisit in the SRP settings.
Dominance rule. For two labels l and l′on the same node, label l′is dominated by label l if the following conditions are satisfied and at
least one of them is not equal:
(i) l.Rc ≤l′.Rc (cid:0) (l′.Rt (cid:0) l.Rt)
(ii) l.Rt ≤l′.Rt
(iii) l.Rw ≤l′.Rw
(iv) l.Φ⊆l′.Φ
It should be noted that condition (i) is much tighter than the condition that is commonly used in VRPs with the objective of
minimizing total travel distance, i.e., l.Rc ≤l′.Rc. A stricter dominance rule means less labels can be dominated, thus there are more
labels to be processed (the pricing problem is harder to solve). If label l′ is dominated by other labels, label l′ can then be safely
discarded without affecting the final optimal results.
The dynamic programming ng-route algorithm is presented in Algorithm 2. Algorithm 2 finds the best route with given graph GN
and ng-sets V i, which may be very time-consuming in large instances. When used under CG, to save computing time, Algorithm 2 can
be terminated as soon as a certain number of paths with negative reduced cost have been found.
(c) Acceleration techniques
Although finding non-elementary shortest paths using Algorithm 2 is faster than finding the exact solution for elementary shortest
path problem, the pricing problem is still hard to solve, especially in large-scale instances. In this work, we further utilize the following
162
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Algorithm 3
Edge-based branching procedure.
Input: path usages from a CG solution
Output: two child nodes of the current node
1: Calculate edge usages based on path usages from a CG solution.
2: Select multiple candidate edges (10 edges in this study) with their usages closed to 0.5. Evaluate the impact of performing branching on these candidate edges
as in Dabia et al. (2013). The quick pricing heuristic used in this study is the dynamic programming algorithm using heuristic domination and truncated labels
introduced in the aforementioned acceleration techniques. Select an edge, say (i, j, ρ), from all candidate edges such that branching on it results in the tightest
estimated lower bound.
3: (Child node one) remove edge (i, j, ρ) from the graph used in the pricing problem.
4: (Child node two) remove edge set {(i′, j′, ρ′)|(i′, j′, ρ′) ∈EN,i′=i}, edge set {(i′, j′, ρ′)|(i′, j′, ρ′) ∈EN,j′=j}, and edge set {(i′, j′, ρ′)|(i′, j′, ρ′) ∈EN,i′=j, j′=i} from
the graph used in the pricing problem, but keep edge (i, j, ρ).
5: return child node one, child node two
Fig. 8. The overall framework of the BnB module.
163
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Fig. 9. Corridors used for time-dependent travel time modeling evaluation.
three techniques to speed up Algorithm 2.
Decremental state-space relaxation. It is observed that the larger ng-set of nodes are, the harder it is to solve the pricing problem.
Therefore, instead of directly using the complete ng-set V i, Algorithm 2 can start with a subset of ng-set V i, i.e., V ′
i
, for each node i
and iteratively add nodes from V i to V ′ i until a valid ng-route is found. A node to be added to V ′ i should satisfy the following
requirement: the absence of that node in V ′ leads to a cycle in the final route that prevents the route from being an ng-route.
i
Heuristic domination. The first condition in the dominance rule presented above is by far stricter than the condition used in VRPs
with the objective of minimizing total travel distance, which is l.Rc ≤l′.Rc. Using the condition l.Rc ≤l′.Rc is of course helpful to
dominate more labels, then accelerates the pricing process. However, some valid labels will also be discarded, which may affect the
final solution. In our experiments, we found that only a small portion of valid labels are discarded due to the use of the loose
domination condition. In other words, a relatively good solution can still be obtained with condition l.Rc ≤l′.Rc in a much shorter time.
Therefore, before using the exact dominance condition, i.e., l.Rc ≤l′.Rc (cid:0) (l′.Rt (cid:0) l.Rt), the loose condition will be used until no valid
route can be found.
Truncated labels. As in Yao et al. (2021), a truncated version of dynamic programming is used before calling the exact dynamic
programming presented in Algorithm 2. In the truncated version, each node only maintains a limited number of promising labels, e.g.,
100 labels with the least reduced cost. Note that, as the number of labels in the truncated version is limited, running one iteration of the
truncated version is very fast, therefore we do not allow node revisiting and do not use heuristic domination such that routes with
higher quality can be obtained.
Branch and bound
An optimal solution obtained from the CG module may contain fractional path usages, making it infeasible for the MP (model M3-
CTR). Therefore, BnB module is further utilized to produce an integer optimal solution based on results from the CG module.
(a) Branching rule
If an optimal solution obtained from the CG module is fractional, the BnB module will perform branching on an edge with a
fractional usage. The branching process is presented in Algorithm 3.
Child node one forces sprinkler trucks not to use edge (i, j, ρ), while child node two forces sprinkler trucks to use edge (i, j, ρ) if
164
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Table 6
Characteristics of the 12 corridors.
Corridor name Type # of links Corridor length (mile) LLS (mph) HLS (mph) ALS (mph) ALCD (hour)
US15 South_S Arterial 39 28.6 8.5 60.8 39.41 2.73
VA267 West_W Freeway 20 13.0 16.6 74.7 63.80 0.49
VA659_S Arterial 17 10.3 8.9 45.1 31.18 2.39
RT7 North_W Arterial 36 19.7 14.0 62.1 44.76 3.68
VA28 North_N Expressway 28 13.8 19.2 68.1 60.59 1.10
I66 outside Beltway_W Freeway 50 27.9 15.0 74.7 58.47 2.93
US29 West_W Arterial 27 13.1 14.0 55.9 42.19 2.82
US29 Middle_W Arterial 17 11.8 11.5 51.2 26.45 6.76
VA234_N Arterial 25 21.8 20.1 57.2 43.40 2.60
VA286 South_N Arterial 27 19.1 14.4 58.1 47.15 1.40
I395_E Freeway 28 9.7 6.1 65.8 43.26 5.63
US1 Middle_N Arterial 14 13.7 8.8 52.7 36.88 4.74
Notes: HLS – highest link speed, LLS – lowest link speed, ALS – average link speed, ALCD – average link congestion duration for an entire day
Table 7
Comparison between observed and modeled speed across all links and 15-min interval resolution on 12 selected corridors.
Corridor name Mean link MAE (mph) Mean link MAPE (%) Max link MAE (mph)
US15 South_S 2.77 8.83 4.77
VA267 West_W 2.86 4.52 3.22
VA659_S 2.38 8.48 3.62
RT7 North_W 4.09 11.04 5.91
VA28 North_N 2.47 4.55 5.03
I66 outside Beltway_W 4.35 9.10 7.52
US29 West_W 2.91 7.75 6.34
US29 Middle_W 4.02 16.92 7.64
VA234_N 3.20 8.14 7.53
VA286 South_N 3.05 7.47 5.94
I395_E 7.55 27.27 12.50
US1 Middle_N 3.41 11.08 6.99
Notes: MAE – mean absolute error, MAPE – mean absolute percentage error
service node i is in their routes.
(b) Searching strategy
A searching strategy determines the sequence of solving active BnB nodes, and different strategies may affect the performance of
the BnB module for a specific problem. Breadth-first search (BFS) and depth-first search (DFS) are the two widely used searching
strategies. Generally, BFS is helpful to improve the global lower bound (GLB) of a problem, while DFS is useful to quickly find a feasible
solution thus contributes to improving the global upper bound (GUB) of the problem. Benefitting from mature parallel computing
technologies, both BFS and DFS are implemented and run in parallel in this work. The overall framework of the BnB module designed
in this paper is presented in Fig. 8.
From Fig. 8, in our implementation, in addition to performing BnB-DFS loop and BnB-BFS in parallel, as nodes in the same layer in
BnB-BFS are independent from each other, solving nodes in Step 2b.1 is also conducted in a parallel manner.
6. Computational experiments
In this section, extensive numerical experiments are conducted to evaluate the methods developed in this paper. Specifically, 12
corridors in the Washington DC metropolitan area are first selected to demonstrate the suitability of the proposed time-dependent
travel time modeling method. Based on calibrated travel time functions, three sets of SRP instances with different sizes are
designed to examine the performance of the three models, followed by an analysis on the system impact of vehicle routings. Finally,
sensitivity analysis of solution methods is performed.
6.1. Modeling of time-dependent travel time
Fig. 9 presents the 12 corridors selected for evaluating the proposed time-dependent travel time modeling method, including 1
expressway corridor, 3 freeway corridors, and 8 arterial corridors that experience different levels of traffic congestion. Table 6
summarizes the characteristics of the selected corridors. The time horizon of interest is set as 6:00 – 20:00. Note that transportation
networks typically experience two or three congestion periods across a day (morning peak hours, afternoon peak hours, and possibly
midday hours), while the method proposed in Section 2 is suitable for a single congestion period analysis. Hence, we split the analysis
165
166
TransportationResearchPartB166(2022)143–182
Fig. 10. Heatmap comparison between observed and modeled speed on corridor US29 Middle_W.
J.
Lu
et
al.
167
TransportationResearchPartB166(2022)143–182
Fig. 11. Heatmap comparison between observed and modeled speed on corridor I395_E.
J.
Lu
et
al.
168
TransportationResearchPartB166(2022)143–182
Fig. 12. Modeled speed and observed speed comparison on two links.
J.
Lu
et
al.
J. Lu et al. T r a n s p o r t a t i o n R e s e a r c h P a r t B 1 6 6(2022)143–182
Table 8
Characteristics of three benchmark instance sets.
Small-size benchmark instance set Medium-size benchmark instance set Large-size benchmark instance set
Instance Links MinLL MaxLL Instance Links MinLL MaxLL Instance Links MinLL MaxLL
S1 16 0.19 0.53 M1 28 0.14 0.68 L1 72 0.04 0.68
S2 14 0.22 0.28 M2 36 0.11 0.65 L2 66 0.11 0.65
S3 16 0.09 0.29 M3 28 0.09 0.31 L3 60 0.09 0.54
S4 16 0.07 0.24 M4 30 0.14 0.42 L4 54 0.08 0.42
S5 16 0.13 0.50 M5 30 0.15 0.5 L5 60 0.13 0.5
S6 14 0.10 0.46 M6 38 0.13 0.44 L6 74 0.13 0.54
S7 18 0.18 0.50 M7 32 0.18 0.5 L7 62 0.18 0.63
S8 14 0.07 0.18 M8 34 0.07 0.49 L8 62 0.07 0.49
S9 16 0.13 0.37 M9 30 0.13 0.56 L9 50 0.13 0.56
S10 16 0.08 0.31 M10 28 0.15 0.33 L10 62 0.09 0.62
S11 15 0.09 0.68 M11 32 0.07 0.23 L11 60 0.07 0.7
S12 14 0.10 0.44 M12 30 0.09 0.41 L12 60 0.09 0.38
S13 18 0.09 0.23 M13 28 0.07 0.7 L13 58 0.07 1.43
S14 18 0.09 0.27 M14 32 0.09 0.37
S15 16 0.15 0.74 M15 28 0.1 0.74
Average 16 0.12 0.40 Average 31 0.11 0.49 Average 62 0.10 0.63
Notes: MinLL and MaxLL represent minimum link length and maximum link length respectively, with the unit of mile
time horizon into three periods, including AM (6:00-10:00), MD (10:00-14:00), and PM (14:00-20:00), then sequentially apply the
method for each period. The dataset used for method evaluation was collected from the Regional Integrated Transportation Infor-
mation System (RITIS). The raw dataset contains 5-minute space-mean traffic speed data from loop detectors and probe vehicles for a
majority of links along each corridor. We first calibrate congestion duration P, average discharge rate μ, and inflow demand curvature
parameter γ using the four-step method proposed in Section 2.1. Then smoothed time-dependent travel times are estimated based on
Eq. (8) for each link along corridors.
Table 7 compares the observed speed and modelled speed calibrated from the fluid-queue model with polynomial arrival rates. The
measure in terms of travel speed is selected as it is more intuitive than link travel time depending on a specific link length. First,
reasonable modeling accuracy was achieved on all corridors with varied degrees of congestion. The heavily congested corridor I395_E
has the highest mean link MAE (7.55 mph) and mean link MAPE (27.27%), as it has a relatively long congestion duration (5.63 hours
for all three congestion periods during the entire day in Table 6). It should be remarked that, under a low average traffic speed
associated with a heavy congestion, a typical deviation in absolute speed values could still result in a relatively large percentage
difference, due to the smaller value in the denominator. In this regard, the mean link-based MAPE of corridor I395_E is still explainable.
Second, for each corridor, max link MAE are not significantly worse than corresponding mean link MAE, indicating that the
approximation error is reasonably bounded along each corridor. In short, better calibration results are observed on the corridors with a
shorter congestion duration, whereas the corridors with severer congestion have larger modeling errors (e.g., corridor US29 Middle_W
and I395_E).
To further examine the travel time modeling accuracy, Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 present the heatmap comparison between the observed
and modeled travel speed on two corridors with a relatively poor modeling accuracy in Table 7, i.e., corridor US29 Middle_W and
I395_E. On both corridors, the overall modeled speed pattern is closed to the corresponding observed one. Specifically, areas affected
by congestion propagation (grey dash rectangles) have been realistically captured.
Focusing on two links with different traffic congestion patterns from corridor I395_E and corridor US1 Middle_N, Fig. 12 provides
the time-dependent observed and modeled speed across the analysis time horizon. The congestion occurs in the periods of AM and MD
on link 32609, whereas only am experiences significant delay on link 31948. One can observe that, for the link with a single congestion
period (link 31948), the modeled speed closely matches the observed speed. However, for the link with multiple congestion periods
(link 32609), there are still obvious deviations between two lines, which highlights the challenges in modeling complex and heavy
traffic congestion.
6.2. Performance evaluation of the solution methods
As summarized in Table 8, three sets of instances with different sizes are designed to evaluate the three optimization models
developed in this paper. Instance networks consist of expressway, freeway and arterial link. Travel time functions calibrated on the 12
representative corridors are applied to links in benchmark instances according to their road types. Our open-source repository can be
found on Github at https://github.com/jiawlu/Time_Dependent_VRP_BnP.
The first instance set includes 15 small-size instances. The average number of road links to be cleaned is 16. The length of links in
the first set ranges from 0.07 to 0.74 mile. The second set contains 15 medium-size instances, where the number of road links ranges
from 28 to 38. The last set includes 13 large-size instances, with 62 links to be cleaned on average for each instance network. For all of
the instances, the planning horizon is 3 hours. The vehicle capacity is 1200 gallons of water, and it is assumed that cleaning 1 mile of
road consumes 400 gallons of water. The speed limit of sprinkler trucks in the cleaning mode and deadheading mode is set as 5 mph
and 14 mph, respectively. We assume that there is no limit on sprinkler fleet size, but each sprinkler has an acquisition cost of
169
170
TransportationResearchPartB166(2022)143–182
Table 9
Performance comparisons of three proposed models on small-size instances.
Instance M1-TEN (LR) M2-STD (MILP Solver) M3-CTR (BnP)
LB UB Gap (%) ST (s) MU (GB) LB UB Gap (%) ST (s) MU (GB) LB UB Gap (%) ST (s) MU (GB)
S1 108.01 112.6 4.08 136 0.14 23.34 112.38 79.23 900 22.33 112.38 112.38 0.0 1 0.0
S2 70.73 76.0 6.94 135 0.17 15.15 78.07 80.59 900 21.74 75.65 75.65 0.0 3 0.0
S3 65.96 73.4 10.13 540 0.54 10.0 73.03 86.31 900 22.46 73.03 73.03 0.0 20 0.0
S4 48.16 51.6 6.66 591 0.55 11.28 51.87 78.25 900 26.97 51.85 51.85 0.0 212 1.15
S5 77.64 82.6 6.01 315 0.28 12.59 83.24 84.87 900 22.68 82.36 82.36 0.0 5 0.0
S6 71.91 77.0 6.61 274 0.37 21.09 77.05 72.63 900 20.71 77.05 77.05 0.0 4 0.0
S7 120.59 132.0 8.64 284 0.29 15.32 131.87 88.38 900 21.72 131.87 131.87 0.0 6 0.0
S8 39.31 45.6 13.8 899 1.18 11.76 45.84 74.35 900 17.79 45.84 45.84 0.0 264 3.65
S9 74.91 82.6 9.31 293 0.24 13.24 80.28 83.5 900 13.67 80.02 80.02 0.0 4 0.0
S10 63.25 71.4 11.42 333 0.33 12.44 71.12 82.5 900 20.15 71.12 71.12 0.0 16 0.0
S11 121.22 130.8 7.32 900 0.94 62.99 130.69 51.8 900 19.88 130.69 130.69 0.0 1 0.0
S12 59.30 59.4 0.16 143 0.17 15.4 72.27 78.69 900 19.02 59.48 59.48 0.0 1 0.0
S13 68.94 78.0 11.62 227 0.26 11.32 78.9 85.65 900 27.19 78.53 78.53 0.0 62 6.83
S14 53.81 56.0 3.91 434 0.64 10.0 56.35 82.25 900 4.1 54.49 56.29 3.2 900 0.47
S15 109.57 111.4 1.65 273 0.37 26.66 113.35 76.48 900 26.75 111.4 111.4 0.0 1 0.0
Average 7.22 385 0.43 79.03 900 20.48 0.21 100 0.81
J.
Lu
et
al.
171
TransportationResearchPartB166(2022)143–182
Table 10
Performance comparisons of three proposed models on medium-size instances.
Instance M1-TEN (LR) M2-STD (MILP Solver) M3-CTR (BnP)
LB UB Gap (%) ST (s) MU (GB) LB UB Gap (%) ST (s) MU (GB) LB UB Gap (%) ST (s) MU (GB)
M1 199.29 226.2 11.9 1265 0.98 151.12 212.76 28.97 1800 77.36 211.4 211.4 0.0 758 106.24
M2 215.73 245.8 12.23 1800 1.58 38.14 - - 1800 17.23 221.28 221.28 0.0 27 0.0
M3 125.77 147.4 14.68 1182 1.08 10.0 146.64 93.18 1800 62.52 134.04 146.64 8.59 1800 156.71
M4 185.04 193.2 4.22 1800 1.11 53.32 193.07 72.39 1800 24.98 190.07 190.07 0.0 14 0.0
M5 217.37 232.4 6.47 1800 1.25 232.48 232.48 0.0 1186 9.19 232.48 232.48 0.0 4 0.0
M6 198.56 227.2 12.61 1800 1.35 10.0 253.17 96.05 1800 11.4 202.72 215.2 5.8 1800 169.99
M7 215.99 237.6 9.1 1800 1.09 15.2 - - 1800 14.71 225.52 225.52 0.0 20 0.0
M8 132.51 160.4 17.39 1800 1.6 10.03 153.4 93.46 1800 28.81 136.06 150.12 9.37 1800 1.45
M9 185.2 201.2 7.95 1800 1.11 22.0 194.04 88.66 1800 35.02 189.89 192.76 1.49 1800 179.87
M10 148.68 156.0 4.69 1223 0.79 25.78 155.64 83.44 1800 24.82 153.03 153.03 0.0 22 0.0
M11 98.67 116.4 15.23 1800 1.7 10.0 112.2 91.09 1800 93.41 106.22 112.92 5.93 1800 4.62
M12 199.69 218.6 8.65 1245 0.92 13.29 222.67 94.03 1800 23.09 205.63 215.16 4.43 1800 132.7
M13 167.8 189.0 11.22 1800 1.27 10.02 186.37 94.62 1800 118.91 173.61 184.68 5.99 1800 175.27
M14 192.94 225.6 14.48 1800 1.1 10.0 197.49 94.94 1800 74.56 197.49 197.49 0.0 14 0.0
M15 198.52 225.0 11.77 1800 0.8 31.31 222.55 85.93 1800 30.59 204.3 222.55 8.2 1800 132.2
Average 10.84 1648 1.18 81.12 1759 43.11 3.32 1017 70.6
J.
Lu
et
al.
172
TransportationResearchPartB166(2022)143–182
Table 11
Performance comparisons of three proposed models on large-size instances.
Instance M1-TEN (LR) M2-STD (MILP Solver) M3-CTR (BnP)
LB UB Gap (%) ST (s) MU (GB) LB UB Gap (%) ST (s) MU (GB) LB UB Gap (%) ST (s) MU (GB)
L1 203.71 632.0 67.77 3600 9.61 10.0 - - 3600 25.26 531.0 543.87 2.37 3600 8.39
L2 159.6 540.4 70.47 3600 8.59 10.0 - - 3600 21.36 450.57 467.53 3.63 3600 22.02
L3 112.4 629.6 82.15 3600 6.15 10.0 - - 3600 13.5 553.44 558.19 0.85 3600 3.39
L4 10.0 346.8 97.12 3600 9.27 10.0 431.64 97.68 3600 19.71 330.26 341.46 3.28 3600 12.14
L5 10.0 789.8 98.73 3600 10.08 10.0 - - 3600 15.8 371.99 403.93 7.91 3600 4.19
L6 10.0 647.0 98.45 3600 9.86 10.0 - - 3600 17.99 465.71 504.8 7.74 3600 10.46
L7 69.64 1111.2 93.73 3600 8.29 186.99 - - 3600 14.08 503.75 519.44 3.02 3600 19.36
L8 10.0 625.8 98.40 3600 9.50 10.0 - - 3600 22.12 303.62 320.1 5.15 3600 7.55
L9 396.03 772.4 48.73 3600 5.32 105.18 - - 3600 13.59 602.83 602.83 0.0 12 0.71
L10 27.06 637.4 95.76 3600 8.36 10.0 - - 3600 16.8 382.14 399.41 4.32 3600 4.24
L11 10.0 694.0 98.56 3600 8.45 10.0 - - 3600 17.55 320.05 338.0 5.31 3600 4.57
L12 162.28 1022.2 84.12 3600 7.55 10.0 - - 3600 15.8 514.32 545.44 5.7 3600 23.17
L13 313.87 935.8 66.46 3600 5.32 10.0 - - 3600 15.32 639.36 678.18 5.72 3600 15.72
Average 84.65 3600 8.18 99.82 3600 - 4.23 3324 10.45
J.
Lu
et
al.
