IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.26,NO.1,FEBRUARY2022 73
Genetic Programming With Niching for Uncertain
Capacitated Arc Routing Problem
Shaolin Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yi Mei , Senior Member, IEEE,
Mengjie Zhang , Fellow, IEEE, and Xin Yao , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The uncertain capacitated arc routing problem I. INTRODUCTION
is an important optimization problem with many real-world
CAPACITATED arc routing problem (CARP) [1] is a
applications. Genetic programming is considered a promising
classic combinatorial optimization problem with a num-
hyper-heuristic technique to automatically evolve routing poli-
cies that can make effective real-time decisions in an uncertain berofreal-worldapplications,suchaswastecollection[2]and
environment. Most existing research on genetic programming wintergritting[3].ThemaingoalofCARPistoserveasetof
hyper-heuristicfortheuncertaincapacitatedarcroutingproblem
edges in a graph using a fleet of vehicles with the minimum
only focused on the test performance aspect. As a result, the
cost. CARP is considered as an arc routing counterpart to the
routing policies evolved by genetic programming are usually too
large and complex, and hard to comprehend. To evolve effec- well-knownvehicleroutingproblem(VRP).Ithasbeenproved
tive, smaller, and simpler routing policies, this article proposes to be NP-hard [4] and received much research interest. Many
a novel genetic programming approach, which simplifies the approaches have been proposed for dealing with CARP [4].
routing policies during the evolutionary process using a nich-
However, most previous studies assume that the environment
ing technique. The simplified routing policies are stored in an
isstatic,wherealltheparameters(e.g.,taskdemandandtravel
external archive. We also developed new elitism, parent selec-
tion, and breeding schemes for generating offspring from the cost) are fixed and known in advance. This is usually not true
original population and the archive. The experimental results in the real world, where the environment is often uncertain
showthatthenewlyproposedapproachcanachievesignificantly
and dynamic. For example, in waste collection, the amount of
better test performance than the current state-of-the-art genetic
wastetobecollectedisnotknowninadvanceandvariesfrom
programming algorithms for the uncertain capacitated arc rout-
ing problem. The evolved routing policies are smaller, and thus one day to another.
potentially more interpretable. Uncertain CARP (UCARP) [5]–[7] was proposed to bet-
ter reflect the reality. A variety of uncertainties, such as
Index Terms—Capacitated arc routing, genetic programming,
hyper-heuristic,programsimplification,stochasticoptimization. the stochastic task presence and demand, stochastic edge
deadheadingcost,andstochastictraveltime,havebeenconsid-
ered[6].InadditiontotheNP-hardnessinheritedfromCARP,
the main challenge in UCARP is the route failure caused by
the stochastic task demand. A route failure occurs when the
remainingcapacityofthevehiclebecomesinsufficienttoserve
Manuscript received October 10, 2020; revised April 13, 2021 and June the edge, because the actual demand of an edge that needs to
19, 2021; accepted June 24, 2021. Date of publication July 7, 2021;
be served exceeds the vehicle’s expected demand. Therefore,
date of current version January 31, 2022. This work was supported
in part by the Marsden Fund of New Zealand Government under thevehiclehastogobacktothedepottorefillandcomeback
Contract VUW1509 and Contract VUW1614; in part by the Research to finish serving the edge again. A route failure might lead to
Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems; in part by the Guangdong
a high recourse cost.
Provincial Key Laboratory under Grant 2020B121201001; in part by
the Program for Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Enterpreneurial Traditional solution optimization approaches for dynamic
Teams under Grant 2017ZT07X386; in part by the Shenzhen Science and routing problem, such as the mathematical programming [1],
TechnologyProgramunderGrantKQTD2016112514355531;andinpartby
genetic algorithm [7], particle swarm optimisation [8], and
the Program for University Key Laboratory of Guangdong Province under
Grant 2017KSYS008. The work of Shaolin Wang was supported by the Markov decision processes [9], cannot effectively handle the
VictoriaUniversityofWellingtonPh.D.Scholarship.(Correspondingauthor: routefailureinUCARP.Ontheonehand,thetraditionalsolu-
ShaolinWang.)
tion optimisation approaches try to optimise a solution (i.e.,
Shaolin Wang, Yi Mei, and Mengjie Zhang are with the Evolutionary
Computation Research Group, School of Engineering and Computer a solution that performs reasonably well in all possible envi-
Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington 6140, ronments) beforehand. It is repaired by the recourse operator
New Zealand (e-mail: shaolin.wang@ecs.vuw.ac.nz; yi.mei@ecs.vuw.ac.nz;
if a route failure occurs. However, the preplanned solution is
mengjie.zhang@ecs.vuw.ac.nz).
Xin Yao is with the Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous not flexible enough, and cannot be sufficiently changed by
Systems, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Southern
the recourse operator to cope with the dynamic nature of the
University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China, and also
with CERCIA, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, route failure situation. In addition, it may induce a large extra
BirminghamB1S2TT,U.K.(e-mail:xiny@sustc.edu.cn). recourse cost in some situations. On the other hand, some
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
solution optimisation methods [9], [10] aim to reoptimise the
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2021.3095261.
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/TEVC.2021.3095261 remaining routes when a route failure occurs. Although this
1089-778X(cid:2)c 2021IEEE.Personaluseispermitted,butrepublication/redistributionrequiresIEEEpermission.
Seehttps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.htmlformoreinformation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
74 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.26,NO.1,FEBRUARY2022
can potentially obtain better solutions, the reoptimisation pro- threshold. The final test performance is highly sensitive to
cessbyrunningthesolutionoptimisationalgorithmistypically these parameters, and it is hard to set them properly. To the
too slow to respond in real time. best of our knowledge, there is no existing study that imple-
The routing policy-based approaches [11] are promising ments the simplification based on the phenotype of GP trees.
techniques that can effectively handle the uncertain envi- Also, there is no existing study that applies GP simplifica-
ronment in UCARP. Unlike traditional solution optimisation tiontoGPHHforUCARPtoevolvebotheffectiveandsimple
approaches, these approaches do not have to preplan any routing policies.
solution. On the other hand, they use routing policies to To simplify a GP tree based on phenotypic behavior, we
guide a vehicle to determine which task to serve next as aim to replace a large tree with another smaller tree with the
soon as it becomes idle [11]. A typical manually designed same phenotypic behavior. An intuitive approach is to group
routing policy is the path scanning [12]. However, numer- the individuals in the population based on their phenotypic
ous factors, such as the objective(s) and the graph topology behavior (each group contains the individuals with the same
can affect the effectiveness of the routing policy [13]. The behavior) and simplify all the individuals in each group by
genetic programming hyper-heuristic (GPHH) is considered replacing itwiththesmallestindividual inthatgroup. Wecall
as a promising technique that can automatically evolve effec- this approach niching simplification, since it is similar to the
tive heuristics for dynamic problems [14], such as scheduling niching techniques [39], [40] that divides the individuals in
problems [15]–[18] and resource allocation problems [19]. the population into different groups/niches.
Recently,GPHHhasalsobeensuccessfullyappliedtoUCARP The overall goal of this article is to propose a novel GPHH
to evolve effective routing policies automatically [20]–[24]. that simplifies the individuals during the evolutionary pro-
However, the routing policies evolved by GPHH are usu- cess based on their phenotypic behavior. In this way, we
ally too large and complex, which usually leads to poor can obtain both more effective and smaller routing policies,
interpretability. Evolving small and simple routing policies which can be potentially more interpretable and generaliz-
(without losing effectiveness) can help end-users understand able. To achieve this goal, we have the following research
the evolved routing policies better so that they can use them objectives.
confidently and modify them when necessary. Intuitively, the 1) To develop a new niching simplification scheme based
size (number of nodes) of the routing policy is an essen- on phenotypic behavior. Specifically, the individuals
tial factor that can affect the interpretability, and a larger with the same phenotypic behavior (i.e., fitness in this
(smaller)routingpolicytendstobeharder(easier)tointerpret. study) are grouped into a niche. In each niche, all
Usually, the tree size of the routing policy evolved by GPHH the individuals are replaced by the individual with the
is too large. The main reason is that GP tends to continu- smallest size (so-called representative of the niche).
ously increase the size of its individuals, which is known 2) To compromise the loss of population diversity due to
as bloat [25]–[27]. For bloat control, one can simply limit thenichingsimplification,westillkeeptheoriginalpop-
the tree size or depth during the GP evolution (e.g., [28] ulationandstorethenicherepresentativesinanexternal
and [29]) or design specific genetic operators to consider archive.
both tree size and effectiveness (e.g., [26], [30], and [31]). 3) To develop a multisource breeding mechanism to gen-
However, these approaches cannot balance the two aspects erate offspring from the original population and the
well. Their performance could be biased by either tree size representative archive, respectively.
or effectiveness. 4) To design niching-based elitism and parent selec-
GP simplification is another way to reduce the tree size tion schemes for the breeding from the representative
by removing redundant materials from GP trees. GP pro- archive.
duces trees that typically contain a large number of redundant 5) To develop a new GPHH algorithm with niching
components (subtrees). It is desirable to remove as much (GPHH-N) that incorporates all the above-designed
of these redundant materials as possible without sacrific- components.
ing the exploration ability of GP. Manual simplification on 6) To verify the effectiveness of GPHH-N, and analyse the
the final GP tree has been tried in the past. However, it is routing policies evolved by GPHH-N.
more preferred to simplify GP trees during the search pro- Note that the goal of this article is not to address the inter-
cess [32]. Zhang et al. [33]–[35] and Wong and Zhang [36] pretability problems explicitly, although GPHH-N is expected
have explored the use of algebraic tree simplification with the to evolve smaller and simpler routing policies that are poten-
hashing technique and applied it to regression and classifica- tially more interpretable.
tion problems. Kinzett et al. [37] and Song et al. [38] have
proposednumericaltreesimplificationmethods.Bothmethods
are based on the local effect of a subtree.
II. BACKGROUND
The above simplification methods have several limita- For CARP, there have been various studies considering
tions. First, they detect redundant subtrees based on geno- different aspects of uncertainties [20], [41]–[43], such as
typic information (e.g., tree structure) rather than phenotypic stochastic task demand, stochastic edge deadheading cost,
information (e.g., behavior in decision making). Thus, they stochastictaskpresence,andstochasticedgeexistence.Inthis
may fail to detect some implicit redundancies. Second, they article, we focus on the UCARP [5] that considers all four
need predefined parameters, i.e., simplification rules and important uncertainties.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANGetal.:GENETICPROGRAMMINGWITHNICHINGFORUNCERTAINCAPACITATEDARCROUTINGPROBLEM 75
A. Uncertain Capacitated Arc Routing Problem
(cid:6)j L(cid:6)k −1
Sξ .n (k)×
(cid:7)
1−Sξ .z (k)(e)
(cid:8)
=0 ∀e:dξ (e)=0
i i
AUCARPinstancecanberepresentedbyaconnectedundi-
k=1 i=1
rected graph G(V,E), where V and E indicate the sets of (7)
vertices and edges, respectively. The vertex v ∈ V denotes
0
the depot. Each edge e∈E has a positive random deadhead- where (1) is the objective function. It is used to minimis the
ingcostς¯(e).Afleetofvehicleswithagivenpositivecapacity expected total cost C(Sξ ) of the solution Sξ over all sam-
Q are allocated to serve all the tasks T ⊆E. Each task t ∈T ples ξ ∈ (cid:4). The total cost of a solution on one sample ξ
hasapositiverandomdemandd ¯(t),andapositiveservingcost is calculated by (8), where ς ξ (u,v) is the realized deadhead-
sc(t). The goal is to minimis the total cost of serving all the ing cost between the node u to v in ξ. For any sample ξ, a
tasks in T. Several constraints have to be satisfied. First, all feasible solution Sξ is generated by a routing policy which
the routes must start and end at v ∈ V. Second, each task gradually builds the solution on-the-fly. Equation (2) is the
0
t ∈ T must be served exactly once, but it can be traversed capacity constraint, and dξ refers to the realized task demand
multiple times. Third, the total demand served by each route
inξ.Equations(3)and(4)arethedomainconstraintsofSξ .M
(an edge sequence starts and ends at the depot) cannot exceed and Sξ .N. Equation (5) indicates that all the routes start and
the capacity of the vehicle. end at the depot. Equation (6) means that each task is served
In UCARP, there are a number of random variables, each exactly once (the total demand fraction served by all vehicles
of which can have different samples. Accordingly, a UCARP is 1). Sξ .z ( i k)(e) equals 1 if (Sξ .m ( i k),Sξ .m ( i+ k) 1 )=e, and 0 oth-
instance may contain different samples. In a UCARP instance erwise. Sξ .z (k)(e) indicates whether the edge is a task or not.
sample, each random variable, i.e., the task demand d
¯(t)
and Equation(7)
i
ensuresthatanynonrequirededgeisnotservedat
deadheading cost ς¯(e), takes a realized value. However, the all, i.e., its service fraction is zero everywhere in the solution
realizeddemandofataskisunknownuntilithasbeenserved,
a a n d d va t n h c e e r a e n a d liz i e s d r d ev ea e d al h e e d ad d in u g rin c g os t t he of tr a a n ve e r d s g al e o is ve u r nk th n e ow ed n g i e n . C (cid:3) Sξ (cid:4) = (cid:6)j L(cid:6) k −1(cid:7) ς ξ (cid:7) Sξ .m ( i k),Sξ .m ( i+ k) 1 (cid:8)(cid:8)
The nature of the uncertainties of the environment will lead k=(cid:6)1 i= (cid:3)1 (cid:4)
to two kinds of failures during the serving process. + sc(t)−ς ξ (t) . (8)
1) Route failure the actual demand of a task exceeds the t∈T
vehicle’s remaining capacity. The static CARP is a special case of UCARP, where all
2) Edge failure an edge in the route becomes inaccessible the variables are known in advance. Route failure is the main
(its deadheading cost becomes infinity). extra challenge of UCARP over the static CARP, and it can
When a route failure occurs, the vehicle will go back to the lead to large extra recourse cost.
depot to refill and return to the failed task to complete the
remaining service. When an edge failure occurs, the solu-
B. Related Work
tion can be repaired by finding a shortest detour under the
1) ApproachesforCapacitatedArcRoutingProblem: Most
current situation using pathfinding algorithms (e.g., Dijkstra’s
existing approaches focus on the static CARP. Golden and
algorithm [44]).
A solution to a UCARP instance is represented as S = Wong[1]developedanintegerlinearprogrammingmodeland
(S.M,S.N). S.M = {S.M (1),...,S.M (j)} is a set of ver- solved CARP using the branch-and-cut algorithm. Belenguer
andBenavent[45]appliedacuttingplanealgorithmtoCARP.
tex sequences, where j is the number of vertex sequences
(routes).S.M (k) =(S.m (k),...,S.m (k))standsforthekthroute, Itisguaranteedthattheobtainedsolutionsareoptimalbyusing
1 Lk
exact approaches. However, the approach is limited to only a
where L represents the number of vertices in the kth route.
k
S.N ={S.N (1),...,S.N (j)} is a set of continuous vectors, and small number of instances due to the NP-hardness of CARP.
S.N (k) = (S.n (k),...,S.n (k) ) (S.n (k) ∈ [0,1]) is the fraction Theseapproachescanbecometime-consumingastheproblem
of demand ser 1 ved along t L h k e −1 routeS i .M (k) .The problem can be becomes large.
To obtain reasonably good solutions in a limited time bud-
formulated as follows:
getandforlargerprobleminstances,constructiveheuristicsare
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4)(cid:5)
appliedtoCARP[1].Constructiveheuristicsgenerateapprox-
min Eξ∈(cid:4) C Sξ (1)
imated solutions from scratch. Although these approaches
s.t.
L(cid:6)k −1
dξ
(cid:7)
Sξ .m
i
(k),Sξ .m
i
(
+
k)
1
(cid:8)
×Sξ .n (
i
k) ≤Q ∀k=1,...,j c
th
a
e
n
y
no
a
t
re
gu
m
a
u
ra
c
n
h
te
c
e
he
t
a
h
p
a
e
t
r
t
t
h
h
e
an
ob
ex
ta
a
i
c
n
t
ed
app
so
ro
lu
a
t
c
i
h
o
e
n
s
s
. A
ar
t
e
th
o
e
pt
s
im
am
al
e
,
i=1
time, they can usually provide good enough solutions very
(2)
(cid:7) (cid:8) quickly.Thepathscanningheuristic,augment-mergeheuristic,
(cid:7) Sξ .m i (k) (cid:8) ,Sξ .m ( i+ k) 1 ∈E (3) and Ulusoy’s split heuristic are commonly used constructive
Sξ .n (k) ∈[0,1] (4) heuristics for CARP [12].
i To make an improvement, meta-heuristic approaches have
Sξ .m
1
(k) =Sξ .m (
L
k
k
) =v
0
∀k=1,2,...,j (5) been used in recent years. A typical meta-heuristic algorithm
(cid:6)j L(cid:6)k −1 startsfromoneormoresolutions,anditerativelyimprovesthem.
Sξ .n (k)×Sξ .z (k)(e)=1 ∀e:dξ (e)>0 (6) Thus, meta-heuristic algorithms can usually obtain promising
i i
solutionsinareasonabletimebudget.Typically,solutionsfrom
k=1 i=1
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
76 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.26,NO.1,FEBRUARY2022
meta-heuristic algorithms can be no worse than constructive new MA with an integrated fitness function and a large step-
heuristics since they can take the solution from constructive size local search operator to UCARP. The new MA can find
heuristicsastheirinitialsolutions.Inaddition,theyareusually good solutions for UCARP. The integrated fitness function
lesstime-consumingthantheexactapproaches.Variousmeta- is used to guide the search direction, and the large step-size
heuristicalgorithmshavebeenproposedforCARP,suchastabu local search operator is used to prevent MA being trapped in
search[46],[47],geneticalgorithms[48],memeticalgorithms local optima. Wang et al. [61] focused on finding solutions
(MAs)[12],[49],[50],andantcolonyoptimisation[51]–[53]. that can perform well over a set of UCARP instances and
Meietal.[54]andTangetal.[55]handledlarge-scaleCARP proposedanestimationofdistributionalgorithmwithstochas-
with decomposition approaches. ticlocalsearch(EDASLS).ThenewEDASLSisbasedonthe
To enhance the problem solving for CARP, Feng et al. [56] edge histogram-based sampling algorithm (EHBSA) [62] and
utilized Meme learning and selection to transfer useful struc- a novel stochastic local search (SLS) which can effectively
turesorlatentpatternsthatarecapturedfromprevious experi- handle the uncertainties in UCARP. Recently, Tong et al. [63]
ences of problem-solving. The captured knowledge was then proposedageneralizedmeta-heuristicframeworkforUCARP.
applied to enhance future evolutionary search. Comparing Inaddition,Tongetal.[64]alsoproposedahybridlocalsearch
with existing works, the work in [56] can transfer and reuse framework which can handle the small dynamic changes in
knowledge across problems of different size, structure, or UCARP.
representation. To make an improvement, Feng et al. [57] SomeotherapproachesuseGPHHtoevolveroutingpolicies
proposed a new memetic computing paradigm which con- thatconstructsolutionsgraduallyinrealtime.Itdoesnotmain-
tains four culture-inspired operators, i.e., learning, selection, tain any preplanned solution. Weise et al. [65] first proposed
variation, and imitation. Comprehensive studies on the widely a GPHH for UCARP with a single vehicle and examined its
studiedNP-hardcapacitatedVRP(CVRP)andCARPdomains performance.Theresultsshowed thatroutingpoliciesevolved
have been made. The experimental results showed the bene- byGPHHcouldoutperformmanuallydesignedroutingpolicies.
fitsoftheproposedfasterevolutionarysearchapproach.Rather Liuetal.[20]proposedanovelandeffectivemeta-algorithmto
than transferring knowledge from the same problem domain, filterirrelevantcandidatetasksduringthedecision-makingpro-
Feng et al. [58] proposed an evolutionary memetic comput- cess.Tobetterreflectthereality,themodelwasextendedfrom
ing paradigm that is able to learn and evolve knowledge asingle-vehicletomultivehicleversionbyMeiandZhang[22].
memesthattraversetwodifferentbutrelatedproblemdomains, Then the solution can be generated with multiple vehicles on
i.e., CVRP and CARP, to speed up the search efficiency. the road simultaneously. MacLachlan et al. [21] proposed a
Experimental results showed that evolutionary optimization noveltaskfilteringmethodandaneffectivelook-aheadterminal.
can benefit from different but related problem domains. The Then,MacLachlanetal.[66]examinedtheadvantageofvehicle
appropriate choice of knowledge memes is an essential factor collaborationinhandlingtheuncertainenvironment.Recently,
for enhancing the evolutionary search process. Ardeh et al. [67] applied transfer learning to speed up the
2) Approaches for Uncertain CARP: There are many dif- training process. Liu et al. [68] proposed a new predictive-
ferenttypesofuncertaintiesinreal-worldCARP.Liuetal.[6] reactive approach with Genetic Programming and cooperative
gave a comprehensive review on the uncertain factors in coevolutionwhichevolvedatasksequenceandarecoursepol-
CARP,includingstochastictaskdemand,stochasticedgedead- icy simultaneously. The existing GPHH approaches managed
heading cost, stochastic task presence and stochastic edge to obtain effective routing policies for UCARP. However, the
existence, and the corresponding approaches to address them. interpretabilityoftheevolvedroutingpolicieshasbeenignored.
Many approaches aim to find solutions that can handle all 3) GP Tree Size Reduction Approaches: A typical tree-
possible realizations of the random variables. Typically, the basedGPHHapproachblindlygeneratesGPtreesbyrandomly
output of these approaches consists of two main components: swapping the subtrees of the parents in crossover and replac-
1) a preplanned solution and 2) a recourse operator. First, ing a subtree with a randomly generated subtree in mutation.
the optimisation algorithm produces a solution based on the GP search usually leads to large and complex trees that are
prediction of the environment. Then, the solution is executed hard to interpret without careful control of the tree size. Also,
whilepossiblefailures,suchasroutefailures,couldbehandled a large and complex tree tends to be less generalizable [69].
bytherecourseoperator.Theperformanceoftheseapproaches Therefore,itisessentialtoreducethetreesizeandcomplexity
is highly affected by the accuracy of predicting the stochastic without deteriorating the effectiveness.
environment and the effectiveness of recourse operators. There have been various studies to reduce tree size during
Fleury et al. [41] proposed an MA that integrated an accu- the GP evolutionary process. The most straightforward way is
rate approximation of the expected total cost for CARP with to limit the number of nodes of the tree [28], [29]. However,
stochastic task demand and concluded that MA could be eas- thisstrategyhastwomainlimitations.First,itlimitsthesearch
ily adapted to handle the stochastic task demand and obtain space and may weaken the exploration ability of GP, and thus
better solutions than other simple techniques like keeping a lead to worse effectiveness. Second, it is nontrivial to prede-
slack in each vehicle. Tirkolaee et al. [59] developed a mix fine a reasonable limit for the number of nodes [25]. Another
integerprogrammingmodeltohandlethedemanduncertainty. commonly used strategy is to penalize large trees during the
They also proposed a hybrid meta-heuristic approach based selection, known as the parsimony pressure [70]. However, it
on simulated annealing and a constructive heuristic to obtain is hard to set a proper coefficient of the penalty term with-
good solutions for CARPSD. Wang et al. [60] adapted a out extensive trial and error [26]. Kinzett et al. [30] pointed
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANGetal.:GENETICPROGRAMMINGWITHNICHINGFORUNCERTAINCAPACITATEDARCROUTINGPROBLEM 77
out that it is difficult to obtain a small and effective solu-
tionin somescenarios. The solution could be biased by either
tree size or fitness in GP. Luke and Panait [31] reviewed a
set of bloat control methods in GP and compare them with
the depth limiting method on different problems. The authors
argue that linear parsimony pressure [71] performed the best
in the cross-problem comparison, and the double tournament
(DT) selection [72] performed the second best. However, the
conclusions obtained in [31] are purely empirical.
GP tree simplification methods are an alternative for tree
size reduction. Hooper and Flann [73] utilized the expression
simplificationtosimplifythetrees.Theirsimplificationmethod
employedover200simplificationrulestosimplifyanexpression.
Fig.1. OverallframeworkofGPHH-N.
To speed up the simplification process, Zhang etal.[33]–[35]
and Wong and Zhang [36] proposed the use of algebraic tree
simplificationwiththehashingtechniques.However,thesealge-
braicmethodscannotdetectallkindsofredundancies[74].Itcan
easilysimplifytheexpressionA−Ato0.However,A+10 −100
cannotbesimplifiedtoAdirectly,although10
−100doesnotplay
any significant role in the final output. In addition to the alge-
braicapproach,Kinzettetal.[37]andSongetal.[38]proposed
numericalsimplificationmethods.Thesemethodsarebasedon
the local effect of a subtree. Kinzett et al. [37] removed a Fig.2. IllustrationoftheoffspringgenerationinGPHH-N.
nodeorasubtreeifitsnumericalcontributionissmallerthana
predefinedthreshold.Songetal.[38]replacedtheparentnode
with its child node if the difference between their outputs is
below apredefined threshold.
In summary, most GP simplification methods can only
Fig.3. ExampleofGPtree.
detect redundancies based on genotypic information (con-
tribution of the genotypic subtrees) rather than phenotypic
Section III-F. The multisource breeding process selects par-
information(outputofthewholeGPtree).Thus,manyredun-
ents from both the original and simplified populations so that
dancies will still exist. Also, they require manually selected
thesimplifiedblocksarenotcompletelylost.Wewilldescribe
simplification rules or predefined threshold parameter. The
itsdetailsinSectionIII-G.Therelationshipbetweenthepopu-
final test performance is highly sensitive to these parameters.
lation and representative archive and how the newly proposed
Itishardtosettheseparametersproperly.Thisarticleattempts
operations update them are shown in Fig. 2.
todealwiththeaboveissuesbyproposinganovelGPHHwith
phenotypic simplification using niching.
B. Individual Representation
In this article, each routing policy is represented as a pri-
III. PROPOSEDGPHH-N ority function. The priority function is a combination of the
A. Overall Framework state features, such as the cost from the current location to
the candidate task (CFH) and the cost from the candidate task
TheoverallframeworkofGPHH-NisshowninFig.1.First,
to the depot (CTD). For example, if the priority function is
apopulationofroutingpolicies(eachrepresentedasaGPtree)
“CFH+CTD,” as shown in Fig. 3, the priority function tends
is initialized randomly. Then, the routing policies are evalu-
to select tasks that are closer to the current location and also
atedateachgenerationbasedontheirsimulationperformance
closer to the depot. The routing policy works as a decision-
(total cost). If the stopping criteria are not reached, the popu-
makerduringthesolutionconstructionprocess.Typically,each
lation undergoes the evolutionary process. In the evolutionary
vehicle can only serve one task at a time. The routing pol-
process, routing policies are first simplified by the niching
icy will be applied to each unserved task to determine each
simplification. Details of the niching simplification will be
unserved task’s priority once a vehicle completes its current
given in Section III-D. After that, the smallest tree in each
task and is ready to serve the next task. The task with the
niche is considered the niche representative and is stored in a
best priority value will be served next. The decision process
representativearchive.Thenichingelitismandnichingtourna-
finishes when all the tasks have been served and the routes
mentselectionarethenappliedtoboththeoriginalpopulation
returned as the solution constructed by the routing policy.
and representative archive to produce offspring. The niching
elitism selects diverse trees for the next generation. It will be
C. Fitness Evaluation
described in Section III-E. The newly developed niching tour-
nament selection can ensure that diverse parents are selected Givenaroutingpolicyrp,thefitnessisdefinedbasedonthe
from the simplified population. Details will be discussed in average quality (i.e., total cost) of the routes that it generates.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
78 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.26,NO.1,FEBRUARY2022
Algorithm 1: Fitness Evaluation in GPHH-N Algorithm 2: Niching Simplification
Input:TrainingsetS train,Anunevaluatedpopulationpop Input:OriginalPopulationpop
(cid:7)
Output:Anevaluatedpopulationpop Output:OriginalPopulationpop,SimplifiedPopulationpop,
1
RandomlysampleatrainingsubsetS(cid:7)⊆S
train; RepresentativeArchivearchive
// Evaluate pop using S(cid:7) 1 Initialisearchive=∅;
2
foreachroutingpolicyrp∈popdo
2
foreachroutingpolicyrp∈popdo
// Evaluate rp 3 inNiche(rp)=false;
3
foreachtrainingsamples∈S(cid:7)
do 4 end
4 whiletasksinqueueisnotemptydo 5 foreachroutingpolicyrp∈popdo
5 ifvehicleisreadythen 6 ifinNiche(rp)==truethen
6 Selectwhichtasktoserveusingrp; 7 continue ;
7 end 8 end
8 end 9 Createanewniche={rp};
9
Getthetotalcostofthegeneratedsolution,i.e.tc(rp,s);
10
SetinNiche(rp)=true;
10 end 11 foreachroutingpolicyrp
(cid:7)∈popdo
11
Calculatefit(rp)usingEq.(9);
12
iffit(rp (cid:7))equalstofit(rp)then
(cid:7)
12 end 13 Addrp toniche;
13 returnevaluatedpopulationpop; 14 SetinNiche(rp (cid:7))=true;
15 end
16 end
17 Findouttheindividualwithsmallesttreesizeinds inniche;
Specifically 18 Addinds toarchive;
(cid:6) 19 Replaceallotherindividualsinthenichewithinds;
fit(rp)= 1 tc(rp,s) (9) 20 end (cid:7)
|S(cid:7)| 21 returnpop,pop andarchive;
s∈S(cid:7)
where
S(cid:7)
is a set of instance samples,
|S(cid:7)|
is the number
of instance samples. tc(rp,s) stands for the total cost of the phenotypic characterizations, such as the structure of the
solution obtained by rp on instance sample s. The solution is obtained routes for a given instance, or the phenotypic vec-
constructed based on a simulation process that is commonly tor [76], the fitness-based characterization is shown to be
used in UCARP [23], [29]. Algorithm 1 shows the fitness effective enough empirically, and is very efficient to compute.
evaluation in GPHH-N.
Onecanseethateachroutingpolicyisappliedasapriority
E. Niching Elitism
(heuristic) function. When a vehicle is ready (at a decision-
Elitism is used in GP to avoid losing the previously found
making point), a routing policy is applied to determine which
best individuals. In the traditional elitism scheme, we directly
candidatetasktoservenext.Thequalityofeachroutingpolicy
copy the best individuals (e.g., the top ten individuals in
can be evaluated by applying it to a set of training samples
S(cid:7)
. A solution can be constructed using the routing policy on
terms of fitness) from the population to the next generation.
a training sample
s∈S(cid:7)
.
However, this will lead to a significant loss of diversity after
the niching simplification since all the best individuals might
We randomly resample a subset of training samples for
come from the same niche. We propose a niching elitism
the fitness evaluation (line 1). Such sample rotation has been
scheme to address this issue, which selects the elitists only
commonly used in other studies [20], [75] to improve the
from the representative archive to maintain diversity. First,
generalization of the evolved heuristics.
the archive is sorted based on the fitness value. Then, top
individuals are returned, and they can survive to the next
D. Niching Simplification
generation.
ThenichingsimplificationmethodisshowninAlgorithm2.
It first places the trees with the same phenotype into the same
F. Niching Tournament Selection
niche. Then, each niche identifies the tree with the smallest
treesize(numberofnodesinthetree)inthenicheastheniche In GP, the parents are typically selected by tournament
representative, and replaces all the other trees with this repre- selection. In GPHH-N, each niche can contain many individ-
sentative.Iftherearemultipletreeswiththesmallesttreesize, uals with identical (good) fitness, and traditional tournament
the first identified tree is chosen as the representative. In this selection tends to select identical parents. To avoid such a
way, each niche is represented by a tree with the smallest tree loss of diversity, we modified the tournament selection oper-
sizeunderthesamephenotype.Fig.4showstwotreeswiththe ator. The new niching tournament selection selects only from
same phenotype but different tree sizes. Tree A can be hardly the representative archive so that the parents for crossover are
simplified to Tree B by the algebraic or the numerical simpli- more likely to be different. We set the probability of select-
fication method. However, Tree A can be easily simplified to ing a representative proportional to its niche size using the
Tree B by the niching simplification approach. following equation:
Note that fitness is used as a high-level phenotypic behav- (cid:3) (cid:4) H α
ior of a GP individual. This is a specific design for GPHH P rep i = (cid:9) N i α ,α ∈[0,1] (10)
H
for UCARP, since our preliminary study has shown that i=1 i
many routing policies have different tree structures but the where H stands for the number of individuals in niche,
i i
same fitness value. Although we can use other more precise N refers to the total number of niches. α (0 ≤ α ≤ 1)
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANGetal.:GENETICPROGRAMMINGWITHNICHINGFORUNCERTAINCAPACITATEDARCROUTINGPROBLEM 79
(a) (b)
Fig.4. Twotreeswiththesamefitnessbutdifferenttreesizes.(a)TreeA.(b)TreeB.
Algorithm 3: Multisource Breeding GPHHwiththealgebraicsimplification(GPHH-A)[33].Bloat
Input:Originalpopulationpop,Representativearchivearchive, control approaches are most commonly used to consider both
populationsizeS testperformanceandtreesizeinGP.Inthiscase,wecompareour
Output:Newpopulationnewpop
GPHH-N with three representative bloat control approaches,
1
traditionalelitism(pop);
2
whilesize(newpop)<S/2do i.e., Tarpeian, linear parametric parsimony pressure (LPPP),
3 Selectparentsfrompopusingtraditionaltournamentselection; and DT in the literature [31]. The comparisons are conducted
4 Generateanoffspringbyapplying within the scope of GP approaches. First, the purpose of the
(crossover/mutation/reproductionoperators);
5 Addtheoffspringtonewpop; experiments is to verify whether our new GP algorithm can
6 end obtain both effective and small routing policies. The tree size
7
nichingelitism(archive);
can only be compared with other GP approaches. Second,
8
whilesize(newpop)<Sdo
9 Selectparentsfromarchiveusingnichingtournamentselection; the previous study [66] has already shown that GPHH is a
10 Generateanoffspringbyapplying competitive approach for UCARP, which is no worse than the
(crossover/mutation/reproductionoperators);
state-of-the-art non-GP approaches such as EDASLS [61].
11 Addtheoffspringtonewpop;
12 end ForeachUCARPinstance,werandomlygenerate500train-
13 returnnewpop; ing samples and 500 test samples by randomly sampling the
stochastic task demands and deadheading costs. The sam-
ples share the same graph topology of the UCARP instance
is a parameter to control the balance between exploration but different realized values for the stochastic demands and
and exploitation. When α equals 1, the niching tournament deadheading costs.
selection becomes the traditional tournament selection, which A GP run on a UCARP instance contains training and test
selects parents directly from the simplified population. On the phases. In the training phase, routing policies are trained on
other hand, when α equals 0, each representative will have 500trainingsamples.Thesesamplesaresplitinto100batches,
the same probability of selection regardless of the number of each containing five samples
(S(cid:7)
in (9)). A different batch is
individuals in its niche. A parameter sensitivity analysis on α used for the training in each of the 100 generations. The best
will be given in Section IV-C1. routingpolicyinthefinalpopulationisreturnedasthetrained
policy.Inthetestphase,thetrainedroutingpolicyistestedon
G. Multisource Breeding the500testsamples.Thetestperformanceofaroutingpolicy
The niching simplificatin process may lead to the loss of on the UCARP instance is defined as the average total cost
the potential useful building blocks in the large trees. To over the 500 test samples, calculated as follows:
compensate for such loss, we design a multisource breeding 1 (cid:6)
scheme. The multisource breeding produces offspring from TestPerf(rp)= |S | tc(rp,s) (11)
twosources,i.e.,theoriginalpopulationandtherepresentative test s∈S test
archive. Each source is used to produce half of the offspring where S is the test set, and |S |=500 is the size of the
test test
population. The pseudocode of the multisource breeding is
test set. Fig. 5 shows the training and test phases of one GP
shown in Algorithm 3. We breed offspring from two sources
run on one UCARP instance.
so that each source will produce half of the population in the
next generation.
A. Dataset
IV. EXPERIMENTALSTUDIES
Inthisarticle,weusetheUgdbandUvaldatasets,whichare
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed GPHH-N, we commonlyusedinUCARP[20]–[23].Theyareextendedfrom
compare it with the baseline GPHH (which evolves routing gdb and val which are well known static CARP datasets. The
policiesusingGPHHwithoutanysimplificationmethods)[20], instances in the gdb dataset are mostly small. They contain at
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
80 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.26,NO.1,FEBRUARY2022
TABLEIII
WIN-DRAW-LOSETABLEFORTHEPAIRWISECOMPARISONSBETWEEN
DIFFERENTαVALUESINTERMSOFTestPerformance
Fig.5. TrainingandtestphasesofaGPrunonaUCARPinstance.
TABLEI
TERMINALSETINTHEEXPERIMENTS TABLEIV
WIN-DRAW-LOSETABLEFORTHEPAIRWISECOMPARISONSBETWEEN
DIFFERENTαVALUESINTERMSOFTreeSize
We use the evolutionary computation Java (ECJ) pack-
age [79] to implement all the algorithms. For each UCARP
instance, each compared algorithm is run 30 times indepen-
dently (each run trains a routing policy on the 500 training
samples, and then test it on the 500 test samples).
C. Results and Discussions
TABLEII
PARAMETERSETTINGFORTHECOMPAREDAPPROACHES We compared the algorithms using the Wilcoxon rank-sum
test with the significance level of 0.05. In the tables, “+,”
“−,” or “=” next to each compared algorithm indicates that
the compared algorithm performed statistically significantly
better than, worse than, or comparable to GPHH-N.
1) Parameter Sensitive Analysis on α: The parameter α
is important in balancing exploration and exploitation in the
nichingtournamentselection.Tosettheα value,wecompared
most 55 tasks that need to be served by at most five vehicles. the GPHH-N with three different α values, i.e., 0, 0.5, and 1.
The val dataset contains instances with the number of tasks
Tables III and IV show the results of the pairwise com-
ranging from 34 to 97 by at most ten vehicles.
parisonamongGPHH-N-0.0,GPHH-N-0.5,andGPHH-N-1.0.
ForeachUCARPinstance,thetaskdemandd
¯(t)andtraver-
Each entry is represented in the Win-Draw-Lose format. Win
salcostς¯(e)arerandomvariables.Theyaretransformedfrom
(Lose) indicates the number of instances where the row
the original task demand d(t) and traversal cost ς(e) from the
approachperformssignificantlybetter(worse)thanthecolumn
static CARP instance. The random variables are assumed to
approach. Draw indicates the number of instances where the
follow the truncated normal distribution [20]–[22]:
twoapproachesshownosignificantdifference.TableIIIshows
(cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:7) (cid:8)
d ¯(t)∼N d(t),
d(t)
,ς¯(e)∼N ς(e),
ς
. (12)
the results in terms of the test performance, and Table IV
5 5 shows the results in terms of the tree size. From Table III, we
canseethatbothGPHH-N-0.0andGPHH-N-0.5achievedthe
Anynegativesampledtaskdemandissetto0,andanynegative
best test performance among the compared algorithms. From
sampled traversal cost is set to ∞, which means that the arc
TableIV,GPHH-N-0.5achievedsignificantlysmallertreesize
becomes inaccessible.
than GPHH-N-0.0. Overall, GPHH-N-0.5 is the best in terms
of the test performance and the tree size.
B. Parameter Setting Fig. 6 shows the scatter plot of GPHH-N with different α
The function setis setto {+,−,×,/,min,max},where the values on a representative instance Uval2B. Each shape repre-
“/” operator returns 1 if divided by 0. The terminal set is sents the mean tree size and test performance of the 30 inde-
shown in Table I. Table II shows the parameter settings of the pendent runs. We can see that GPHH-N-0.5 and GPHH-N-0.0
GP algorithms compared in the experiments. The initializa- achieved much better test performance than GPHH-N-1.0. In
tion method of the population for all compared algorithms addition, GPHH-N-0.5 obtained a much smaller tree size than
is Ramped Half-and-Half. All these parameter settings are GPHH-N-0.0. Therefore, α = 0.5 is used in the subsequent
commonly used in the GPHH [20]–[22], [66], [77], [78]. experiments.
Forthecomparedbloatcontrolmethods,theparametersare 2) Test Performance: Tables V and VI show the mean
set according to [31]. The simplification rules for GPHH-A and standard deviation for the test performance over the 30
are set according to [33]. independent runs on Ugdb and Uval instances.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANGetal.:GENETICPROGRAMMINGWITHNICHINGFORUNCERTAINCAPACITATEDARCROUTINGPROBLEM 81
TABLEV
MEANANDSTANDARDDEVIATIONFORTestPerformanceOFCOMPAREDAPPROACHESONTHEUgdbINSTANCESOF30RUNS
DT on 20 out of 34 instances and showed comparable test
performance on the other instances. GPHH-N beat LPPP on
all the instances. The average test performance of GPHH-N
(384.27) is better than all the other approaches.
3) Tree Size: Tables VII and VIIIshow the mean and stan-
dard deviation for the tree size of routing policies of the
compared algorithms on Ugdb and Uval instances.
In Table VII, we can see that GPHH-N can evolve much
smaller routing policies than GPHH on 18 out of 23 instances
ontheUgdbdataset.GPHH-Ncanalsoobtainsmallerrouting
policiesthanGPHH-Aon18outof23instances.InTableVIII,
the results are consistent with that in Table VII. GPHH-N can
evolvemuchsmallerroutingpoliciesthanGPHHon24outof
Fig.6. ScatterplotofGPHH-Nwithdifferentα valueonUval2B. 34 instances on the Uval dataset. It can evolve much smaller
routing policies than GPHH-A on 19 out of 34 instances.
OntheUgdbdataset,wecanseethatGPHH-Nsignificantly NotethatTarpeianandLPPPachievedmuchsmallerrouting
outperformed all the compared algorithms. It performed sig- policies on both datasets. However, their test performance is
nificantly better than GPHH on 11 out of 23 instances and much worse than GPHH-N in most instances. The tree size of
neverperformedworsethanGPHH.Besides,GPHH-Nsignif- routingpoliciesevolvedbyDTiscomparablewiththatinGPHH
icantly outperformed GPHH-A on 9 out of 23 instances while on both datasets. This is because DT first selects the parents
was defeated by GPHH-A on only two instances. GPHH- based on the fitness and then considers the tree size. Thus,
N performed significantly better than Tarpeian on 19 out if all the good individuals selected from the first tournament
of 23 instances and slightly worse on only one instance. selectionarelarge,thereisnochancetoselectsmallindividuals
GPHH-NwasdefeatedbyDTononlyoneinstance.However, inthesecondtournamentselectionprocess.Overall,GPHH-N
it outperformed DT on 10 out of 23 instances. GPHH-N performed well on the tree size, which is expected, as it can
outperformed LPPP on all the instances except Ugdb16. On effectively remove redundant components in GP trees.
average, GPHH-N (283.85) performed the best among all the 4) Test Performance versus Tree Size: To show the results
compared approaches on the Ugdb dataset. more clearly, we also plot the results in a scatter map, where
The same pattern can be observed for the Uval dataset. the x-axis is mean test performance on 30 independent runs
GPHH-N significantly outperformed GPHH on 22 out of and the y-axis is the mean tree size. Fig. 7 shows the scat-
34 instances while never performed worse. GPHH-N outper- ter plot on Ugdb1 and Uval2B. Each compared algorithm is
formed GPHH-A on 24 instances while showed comparable representedasasingledotwithaspecificshapeineachfigure.
resultsontheremainingteninstances.GPHH-NbeatTarpeian From Fig. 7, we can see that GPHH-N dominates all
on32outof34instancesbutnevershowedsignificantlyworse the other methods except Tarpeian and LPPP, which achieve
test performance. GPHH-N also significantly outperformed smaller tree size but much worse test performance. Consider
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
82 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.26,NO.1,FEBRUARY2022
TABLEVI
MEANANDSTANDARDDEVIATIONFORTestPerformanceOFCOMPAREDAPPROACHESONTHEUvalINSTANCESOF30RUNS
TABLEVII
MEANANDSTANDARDDEVIATIONFORTreeSizeOFROUTINGPOLICIESOFTHECOMPAREDALGORITHMSONUgdbINSTANCESOF30RUNS
that the test performance is relatively more important than the As expected, both GPHH-A and GPHH-N can significantly
tree size, we can see that GPNN-N is better than all the other reduce the training time on most instances. This is mainly
compared algorithms. because the simplification operation can remove the redun-
5) TrainingTime: TableIXshowsthemeantrainingtimeof dant components. The simplified routing policies need less
GPHH, GPHH-A, and GPHH-N on Ugdb and Uval instances. time to be evaluated. We can see that GPHH-N can further
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANGetal.:GENETICPROGRAMMINGWITHNICHINGFORUNCERTAINCAPACITATEDARCROUTINGPROBLEM 83
TABLEVIII
MEANANDSTANDARDDEVIATIONFORTreeSizeOFROUTINGPOLICIESOFTHECOMPAREDALGORITHMSONUvalINSTANCESOF30RUNS
Fig.7. Scattermapofcomparedapproachesonrepresentativeinstances.(a)Ugdb1.(b)Uval2B.
TABLEIX
Overall, we can see obvious advantage of GPHH-N over
MEANTrainingTime(SECONDS)OFTHECOMPAREDALGORITHMS
ONUgdbANDUvalDATASETS GPHH, GPHH-A, and the compared bloat control methods.
GPHH-N can obtain better and smaller routing policies in a
shorter training time.
V. FURTHERANALYSIS
A. Effect of Each Component
reducetrainingtimecomparingwithGPHH-A.Thisismainly It has been shown that GPHH-N can evolve both better
because GPHH-N can remove more redundant components and smaller routing policies. There are four main com-
than GPHH-A and makes evolved trees smaller. ponents in GPHH-N. They are the niching simplification
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
84 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.26,NO.1,FEBRUARY2022
TABLEX
WIN-DRAW-LOSETABLEFORTHECONTROLLEDEXPERIMENTS
BETWEENTHECOMPAREDALGORITHMSANDGPHH-NINTERMSOF
TestPerformance
TABLEXI
WIN-DRAW-LOSETABLEFORTHECONTROLLED
EXPERIMENTSBETWEENTHECOMPAREDALGORITHMSANDGPHH-N
INTERMSOFTreeSize
Fig. 8. Scatter map of controlled experiment on a representative instance
Uval2B.
with the similar test performance
(SectionIII-D),nichingelitismscheme(SectionIII-E),niching
tournamentselection(SectionIII-F),andmultisourcebreeding RP=S +max(S ,S ) (13)
1 2 3
(Section III-G). In order to verify the effectiveness of each
where
component of GPHH-N, we designed some controlled experi-
ments.Duetothepagelimit,wewillpresenttheexperimental S =2DEM+CFH−CTD (14)
1
results in the Win-Draw-Lose format. Win (Lose) indicates S =DEM+CFH−CTD (15)
2
thatGPHH-Ncansignificantlyperformbetter(worse)thanthe
S =FUT+RQ−max(CFR1,CTT1). (16)
comparedalgorithm.DrawindicatesthatGPHH-Ncanachieve 3
comparable results with the compared algorithm. Table X To make it easier to understand, we can also transform RP
shows the results in terms of test performance and Table XI to the following IF-ELSE format rule set.
shows the results in terms of the tree size of the evolved if S ≥S then
2 3
routing policies. RP=3DEM+2CFH−2CTD
From Table X, one can see that the niching tournament
else
selection made the most contribution to GPHH-N in terms of if CFR1>CTT1 then
test performance. The test performance decreases on 28 out RP=2DEM+CFH−CTD+FUT+RQ−CFR1
of57instanceswhennichingtournamentselectionisnotused
else
(using traditional tournament selection on the simplified pop- RP=2DEM+CFH−CTD+FUT+RQ−CTT1
ulation instead). The multisource breeding method can make
end if
somecontributions.Thenichingelitismdoes notplayamajor
end if
role in improving the test performance.
We can identify the following patterns and interpretations
FromTableXI,onecanobservethatthenichingtournament
from the above rule set.
selection tends to increase the tree size. The niching tourna-
1) WhenS ≥S ,theRPbecomesRP=3DEM+2CFH−
2 3
mentselectioncanimprovethediversityoftheparentselection
2CTD. There are two possible cases for S ≥ S to
2 3
process and lead to better test performance. However, it will
happen.
also increase the tree size.
a) S is large. This indicates that all the remaining
2
Fig. 8 shows the scatter plot of the GPHH-N with and
taskshavelargedemand,farawayfromthecurrent
without different components. We can see that all the three
location of the vehicle and close to the depot.
components are important in terms of test performance. We
b) S is small. This indicates that there are not many
3
can see that the dot of GPHH-N without niching tournament
remaining tasks, the vehicle is almost full, and all
selection is located at the bottom right area of the plot. This
the remaining tasks have a large CFR1 and CTT1
indicates that niching tournament selection can improve the
(theyarefarawayfromtheothervehiclesandeach
test performance at the cost of larger tree size.
other);
In these two cases, RP prefers the tasks with small
B. Semantic Analysis of Evolved Policies
demands, close to the current location of the vehicle
To gain further understanding of the behavior of the and far away from the depot.
routing policies, a representative routing policy is selected. 2) Otherwise, S < S indicates that the remaining tasks
2 3
Equations (13)–(16) show a selected policy evolved by canhavesmalldemands,areclosetothecurrentlocation
GPHH-NfortheUgdb19instance.Thepolicyhasapromising of the vehicle, and far away from the depot, and the
test performance (63.39, while the mean test performance of vehicleisrelativelyempty.Italsohastwopossiblecases.
GPHH-Nis63.63).Inaddition,ithas21nodes,whichismuch a) CFR1 > CTT1, this indicates that the task is
smaller than the routing policies evolved by other algorithms close to some other tasks, but far away from other
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANGetal.:GENETICPROGRAMMINGWITHNICHINGFORUNCERTAINCAPACITATEDARCROUTINGPROBLEM 85
vehicles.Inthiscase,inadditiontosmalldemands, [5] Y. Mei, K. Tang, and X. Yao, “Capacitated arc routing problem in
close to the current location of the vehicle and far uncertain environments,” in Proc. IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput., 2010,
pp.1–8.
awayfromthedepot,RPalsoprefersthetaskswith
[6] J.Liu,K.Tang,andX.Yao,“Robustoptimizationinuncertaincapaci-
largerCFR1,i.e.,fartherawayfromothervehicles. tatedarcroutingproblems:Progressesandperspectives,”IEEEComput.
b) CFR1<CTT1, this indicates the task is far away Intell.Mag.,vol.16,no.1,pp.63–82,Feb.2021.
[7] H.Tong,L.L.Minku,S.Menzel,B.Sendhoff,andX.Yao,“Towards
from other tasks, but can be close to some other
novel meta-heuristic algorithms for dynamic capacitated arc routing
vehicles.Inthiscase,inadditiontosmalldemands, problems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Parallel Probl. Solving Nat., 2020,
close to the current location of the vehicle and far pp.428–440.
[8] M. R. Khouadjia, B. Sarasola, E. Alba, L. Jourdan, and E.-G. Talbi,
awayfromthedepot,RPalsoprefersthetaskswith
“AcomparativestudybetweendynamicadaptedPSOandVNSforthe
larger CTT1, i.e., far away from other tasks. In vehicle routing problem with dynamic requests,” Appl. Soft Comput.,
other words, RP prefers the isolated tasks toward vol.12,no.4,pp.1426–1439,2012.
[9] N. Secomandi and F. Margot, “Reoptimization approaches for the
the beginning of the routes.
vehicle-routingproblemwithstochasticdemands,”Oper.Res.,vol.57,
no.1,pp.214–230,2009.
[10] G.ChryssolourisandV.Subramaniam,“Dynamicschedulingofmanu-
VI. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK facturingjobshopsusinggeneticalgorithms,”J.Intell.Manuf.,vol.12,
no.3,pp.281–293,2001.
The goal of this work was to evolve both effective and
[11] U.Ritzinger,J.Puchinger,andR.F.Hartl,“Asurveyondynamicand
smaller/simpler routing policies for UCARP. This goal has stochastic vehicle routing problems,” Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 54, no. 1,
been successfully achieved by the newly proposed novel pp.215–231,2016.
[12] P.Lacomme,C.Prins,andW.Ramdane-Cherif,“Competitivememetic
GPHH with a simplification approach using a niching tech-
algorithms for arc routing problems,” Ann. Oper. Res., vol.131,
nique(GPHH-N).GPHH-Nwasexaminedandcomparedwith nos.1–4,pp.159–185,2004.
the basic GPHH approach without simplification (GPHH), [13] J.Jacobsen-Grocott,Y.Mei,G.Chen,andM.Zhang,“Evolvingheuris-
ticsfordynamicvehicleroutingwithtimewindowsusinggeneticpro-
the basic GPHH approach with algebraic simplification
gramming,”inProc.IEEECongr.Evol.Comput.,2017,pp.1948–1955.
(GPHH-A) and three representative bloat control methods [14] H.Al-Sahafetal.,“Asurveyonevolutionarymachinelearning,”J.Roy.
on 57 UCARP instances. The results suggest that GPHH- Soc.NewZealand,vol.49,no.2,pp.205–228,2019.
[15] S.Nguyen,M.Zhang,M.Johnston,andK.C.Tan,“Automaticdesign
N can outperform all the compared approaches in terms of
ofschedulingpoliciesfordynamicmulti-objectivejobshopscheduling
test performance. GPHH-N can also outperform GPHH and via cooperative coevolution genetic programming,” IEEE Trans. Evol.
GPHH-A in terms of tree size and training time. We also Comput.,vol.18,no.2,pp.193–208,Apr.2014.
[16] J. Branke, S. Nguyen, C. W. Pickardt, and M. Zhang, “Automated
analyzed the effect of the newly proposed components by
designofproductionschedulingheuristics:Areview,”IEEETrans.Evol.
a set of controlled experiments. The results showed that all Comput.,vol.20,no.1,pp.110–124,Feb.2016.
the three new components could contribute to evolve smaller [17] F. Zhang, Y. Mei, S. Nguyen, and M. Zhang, “Collaborative multi-
fidelity based surrogate models for genetic programming in dynamic
and better routing policies. The niching tournament selection
flexiblejobshopscheduling,”IEEETrans.Cybern.,earlyaccess,Feb.2,
and multisource breeding components are more effective than 2021,doi:10.1109/TCYB.2021.3050141.
the niching elitism component. Overall, GPHH-N can obtain [18] F. Zhang, Y. Mei, S. Nguyen, and M. Zhang, “Correlation coefficient
basedrecombinativeguidanceforgeneticprogramminghyper-heuristics
better test performance and smaller and potentially more
in dynamic flexible job shop scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.,
interpretable routing policies than the current state-of-the-art vol.25,no.3,pp.552–566,Jun.2021.
GPHH approach. [19] B. Tan, H. Ma, Y. Mei, and M. Zhang, “A cooperative coevolution
geneticprogramminghyper-heuristicapproachforon-lineresourceallo-
In the future, we will consider combining our approach
cation in container-based clouds,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., early
withothersimplificationapproaches.Inaddition,wewillcon- access,Sep.24,2020,doi:10.1109/TCC.2020.3026338.
sider some other ways that can improve the interpretability of [20] Y.Liu,Y.Mei,M.Zhang,andZ.Zhang,“Automatedheuristicdesign
usinggeneticprogramminghyper-heuristicforuncertaincapacitatedarc
evolvedroutingpolicies,suchasGeneticprogrammingvisual-
routing problem,” in Proc. ACM Genet. Evol. Comput. Conf., 2017,
ization techniques and grammar-based Genetic Programming. pp.290–297.
GPHH-N was developed for UCARP. However, it could also [21] J.MacLachlan,Y.Mei,J.Branke,andM.Zhang,“Animprovedgenetic
programming hyper-heuristic for the uncertain capacitated arc routing
beextendedtoevolveeffectiveandsimpleheuristicsforother
problem,”inProc.Aust.JointConf.Artif.Intell.,2018,pp.432–444.
dynamic and uncertain problems such as dynamic job shop [22] Y.MeiandM.Zhang,“Geneticprogramminghyper-heuristicformulti-
scheduling by changing the fitness evaluation and pheno- vehicleuncertaincapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”inProc.ACMGenet.
Evol.Comput.Conf.Companion,2018,pp.141–142.
typic characterization for niching if necessary. We will extend
[23] Y.Liu,Y.Mei,M.Zhang,andZ.Zhang,“Apredictive-reactiveapproach
GPHH-N to other problems in our future work. with genetic programming and cooperative co-evolution for uncer-
tain capacitated arc routing problem,” Evol. Comput., vol. 28, no. 2,
pp.289–316,Jun.2020.
REFERENCES [24] G. Gao, Y. Mei, B. Xin, Y.-H. Jia, and W. N. Browne, “Automated
coordination strategy design using genetic programming for dynamic
[1] B. L. Golden and R. T. Wong, “Capacitated arc routing problems,” multipoint dynamic aggregation,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., early access,
Networks,vol.11,no.3,pp.305–315,1981. Jun.2,2021,doi:10.1109/TCYB.2021.3080044.
[2] S.AmponsahandS.Salhi,“Theinvestigationofaclassofcapacitated [25] S.Bleuler,M.Brack,L.Thiele,andE.Zitzler,“Multiobjectivegenetic
arcroutingproblems:Thecollectionofgarbageindevelopingcountries,” programming: Reducing bloat using SPEA2,” in Proc. IEEE Congr.
WasteManag.,vol.24,no.7,pp.711–721,2004. Evol.Comput.,2001,pp.536–543.
[3] H. Handa, L. Chapman, and X. Yao, “Robust route optimization for [26] E.D.DeJong,R.A.Watson,andJ.B.Pollack,“Reducingbloatandpro-
gritting/saltingtrucks:Acerciaexperience,”IEEEComput.Intell.Mag., motingdiversityusingmulti-objectivemethods,”inProc.Conf.Genet.
vol.1,no.1,pp.6–9,Feb.2006. Evol.Comput.,2001,pp.11–18.
[4] S.Wøhlk,“Adecadeofcapacitatedarcrouting,”inTheVehicleRouting [27] R. Poli, N. F. McPhee, and L. Vanneschi, “Elitism reduces bloat in
Problem: Latest Advances and New Challenges. Boston, MA, USA: genetic programming,” in Proc. Conf. Genet. Evol. Comput., 2008,
Springer,2008,pp.29–48. pp.1343–1344.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
86 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.26,NO.1,FEBRUARY2022
[28] R.Poli,W.B.Langdon,N.F.McPhee,andJ.R.Koza,AFieldGuide [54] Y.Mei,X.Li,andX.Yao,“Cooperativecoevolutionwithroutedistance
toGeneticProgramming,Lulu,AbuDhabi,UAE,2008. groupingforlarge-scalecapacitatedarcroutingproblems,”IEEETrans.
[29] S.Wang,Y.Mei,andM.Zhang,“Novelensemblegeneticprogramming Evol.Comput.,vol.18,no.3,pp.435–449,Jun.2014.
hyper-heuristicsforuncertaincapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”inProc. [55] K.Tang,J.Wang,X.Li,andX.Yao,“Ascalableapproachtocapacitated
Genet.Evol.Comput.Conf.,2019,pp.1093–1101. arcroutingproblemsbasedonhierarchicaldecomposition,”IEEETrans.
[30] D.Kinzett,M.Zhang,andM.Johnston,“Investigationofsimplification Cybern.,vol.47,no.11,pp.3928–3940,Nov.2017.
threshold and noise level of input data in numerical simplification of [56] L. Feng, Y.-S. Ong, I. W.-H. Tsang, and A.-H. Tan, “An evolutionary
geneticprograms,”inProc.IEEECongr.Evol.Comput.,2010,pp.1–8. searchparadigmthatlearnswithpastexperiences,”inProc.IEEECongr.
[31] S. Luke and L. Panait, “A comparison of bloat control methods for Evol.Comput.,2012,pp.1–8.
geneticprogramming,”Evol.Comput.,vol.14,no.3,pp.309–344,2006. [57] L. Feng, Y.-S. Ong, A.-H. Tan, and I. W. Tsang, “Memes as building
[32] D. Kinzett, M. Johnston, and M. Zhang, “How online simplification blocks:Acasestudyonevolutionaryoptimization+transferlearningfor
affectsbuildingblocksingeneticprogramming,”inProc.Conf.Genet. routingproblems,”MemeticComput.,vol.7,no.3,pp.159–180,2015.
Evol.Comput.,2009,pp.979–986. [58] L. Feng, Y. Ong, M. Lim, and I. W. Tsang, “Memetic search with
[33] M. Zhang, P. Wong, and D. Qian, “Online program simplification in interdomain learning: A realization between CVRP and CARP,” IEEE
geneticprogramming,”inProc.Asia–Pac.Conf.Simulat.Evol.Learn., Trans.Evol.Comput.,vol.19,no.5,pp.644–658,Oct.2016.
2006,pp.592–600. [59] E. B. Tirkolaee, M. Alinaghian, M. B. Sasi, and M. S. Esfahani,
[34] M. Zhang and P. Wong, “Genetic programming for medical classifica- “Solvingarobustcapacitatedarcroutingproblemusingahybridsimu-
tion:Aprogramsimplificationapproach,”Genet.Program.Evol.Mach., latedannealingalgorithm:Awastecollectionapplication,”J.Ind.Eng.
vol.9,no.3,pp.229–255,2008. Manag.Stud.,vol.3,no.1,pp.61–76,2016.
[35] M.Zhang,Y.Zhang,andW.Smart,“Programsimplificationingenetic [60] J. Wang, K. Tang, and X. Yao, “A memetic algorithm for uncertain
programmingforobjectclassification,”inProc.Int.Conf.Knowl.Based capacitated arc routing problems,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Memetic
Intell.Inf.Eng.Syst.,2005,pp.988–996. Comput.(MC),2013,pp.72–79.
[36] P.WongandM.Zhang,“AlgebraicsimplificationofGPprogramsduring [61] J.Wang,K.Tang,J.A.Lozano,andX.Yao,“Estimationofthedistri-
evolution,”inProc.Conf.Genet.Evol.Comput.,2006,pp.927–934. butionalgorithmwithastochasticlocalsearchforuncertaincapacitated
[37] D. Kinzett, M. Zhang, and M. Johnston, “Using numerical simplifica- arc routing problems,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 20, no. 1,
tiontocontrolbloatingeneticprogramming,”inProc.Asia–Pac.Conf. pp.96–109,Feb.2016.
Simulat.Evol.Learn.,2008,pp.493–502.
[62] S. Tsutsui, M. Pelikan, and D. E. Goldberg, “Using edge histogram
[38] A. Song, D. Chen, and M. Zhang, “Contribution based bloat control modelstosolvepermutationproblemswithprobabilisticmodel-building
in genetic programming,” in Proc. IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput., 2010, genetic algorithms,” Illinois Genet. Algorithms Lab., Univ. Illinois at
pp.1–8. Urbana-Champaign,Urbana,MI,USA,IlliGALRep.2003022,2003.
[39] S.W.Mahfoud,“Nichingmethodsforgeneticalgorithms,”Ph.D.disser-
[63] H. Tong, L. L. Minku, S. Menzel, B. Sendhoff, and X. Yao, “A
tation, Dept. Gen. Eng., Univ. Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana,
novelgeneralisedmeta-heuristicframeworkfordynamiccapacitatedarc
IL,USA,1995.
routingproblems,”2021.[Online].Available:arXiv:2104.06585.
[40] T.Huang,Y.-J.Gong,S.Kwong,H.Wang,andJ.Zhang,“ANiching
[64] H.Tong,L.Minku,S.Menzel,B.Sendhoff,andX.Yao,“Ahybridlocal
memeticalgorithmformulti-solutiontravelingsalesmanproblem,”IEEE
searchframeworkforthedynamiccapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”in
Trans.Evol.Comput.,vol.24,no.3,pp.508–522,Jun.2020.
Proc.Genet.Evol.Comput.Conf.,2021,p.9.
[41] G. Fleury, P. Lacomme, and C. Prins, “Evolutionary algorithms for
[65] T. Weise, A. Devert, and K. Tang, “A developmental solution to
stochastic arc routing problems,” in Proc. Workshops Appl. Evol.
(dynamic)capacitatedarcroutingproblemsusinggeneticprogramming,”
Comput.,2004,pp.501–512.
inProc.ACMConf.Genet.Evol.Comput.,2012,pp.831–838.
[42] H.Handa,L.Chapman,andX.Yao,“Robustsaltingrouteoptimization
[66] J.MacLachlan,Y.Mei,J.Branke,andM.Zhang,“Geneticprogramming
using evolutionary algorithms,” in Evolutionary Computation in
hyper-heuristicswithvehiclecollaborationforuncertaincapacitatedarc
DynamicandUncertainEnvironments.Berlin,Germany:Springer,2007,
routingproblems,”Evol.Comput.,vol.28,no.4,pp.563–593,2020.
pp.497–517.
[67] M. A. Ardeh, Y. Mei, and M. Zhang, “Genetic programming hyper-
[43] M. Fadzli, N. Najwa, and M. Luis, “Capacitated arc routing problem
heuristic with knowledge transfer for uncertain capacitated arc routing
and its extensions in waste collection,” in Proc. AIP Conf., 2015, Art.
problem,” in Proc. Genet. Evol. Comput. Conf. Companion, 2019,
no050001.
pp.334–335.
[44] E.W.Dijkstraetal.,“Anoteontwoproblemsinconnexionwithgraphs,”
[68] Y.Liu,Y.Mei,M.Zhang,andZ.Zhang,“Apredictive-reactiveapproach
NumerischeMathematik,vol.1,no.1,pp.269–271,1959.
with genetic programming and cooperative coevolution for the uncer-
[45] J. M. Belenguer and E. Benavent, “A cutting plane algorithm for the
tain capacitated Arc routing problem,” Evol. Comput., vol. 28, no. 2,
capacitated arc routing problem,” Comput. Oper. Res., vol. 30, no. 5,
pp.289–316,2020.
pp.705–728,2003.
[69] Q. Chen, B. Xue, and M. Zhang, “Rademacher complexity for
[46] A. Hertz, G. Laporte, and M. Mittaz, “A Tabu search heuristic for the
enhancing the generalization of genetic programming for symbolic
capacitatedarcroutingproblem,”Oper.Res.,vol.48,no.1,pp.129–135,
regression,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., early access, Jul. 16, 2020,
2000.
doi:10.1109/TCYB.2020.3004361.
[47] J. Brandão and R. Eglese, “A deterministic Tabu search algorithm for
thecapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”Comput.Oper.Res.,vol.35,no.4, [70] J.R.KozaandJ.R.Koza,GeneticProgramming:OntheProgramming
pp.1112–1126,2008. of Computers by Means of Natural Selection, vol. 1. Cambridge, MA,
USA:MITPress,1992.
[48] P. Lacomme, C. Prins, and W. Ramdane-Chérif, “A genetic algorithm
for the capacitated arc routing problem and its extensions,” in Proc. [71] M.J.CavarettaandK.Chellapilla,“Dataminingusinggeneticprogram-
WorkshopsAppl.Evol.Comput.,2001,pp.473–483. ming:Theimplicationsofparsimonyongeneralizationerror,”inProc.
[49] K.Tang,Y.Mei,andX.Yao,“Memeticalgorithmwithextendedneigh- IEEECongr.Evol.Comput.(CEC),vol.2,1999,pp.1330–1337.
borhoodsearchforcapacitatedarcroutingproblems,”IEEETrans.Evol. [72] S. Luke and L. Panait, “Fighting bloat with nonparametric parsi-
Comput.,vol.13,no.5,pp.1151–1166,Oct.2009. monypressure,”inProc.Int.Conf.ParallelProbl.SolvingNat.,2002,
[50] Y.Mei,K.Tang,andX.Yao,“Decomposition-basedmemeticalgorithm pp.411–421.
formultiobjectivecapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”IEEETrans.Evol. [73] D. C. Hooper and N. S. Flann, “Improving the accuracy and robust-
Comput.,vol.15,no.2,pp.151–165,Apr.2011. nessofgeneticprogrammingthroughexpressionsimplification,”inProc.
[51] K. F. Doerner, R. F. Hartl, V. Maniezzo, and M. Reimann, “Applying Conf.Genet.Program.,1996,pp.428–428.
antcolonyoptimizationtothecapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”inProc. [74] D.Kinzett, M.Johnston,andM.Zhang,“Numerical simplification for
Int.WorkshopAntColonyOptim.SwarmIntell.,2004,pp.420–421. bloatcontrolandanalysisofbuildingblocksingeneticprogramming,”
[52] L.-N. Xing, P. Rohlfshagen, Y.-W. Chen, and X. Yao, “A hybrid ant Evol.Intell.,vol.2,no.4,p.151,2009.
colonyoptimizationalgorithmfortheextendedcapacitatedarcrouting [75] T. Hildebrandt, J. Heger, and B. Scholz-Reiter, “Towards improved
problem,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. B, Cybern., vol. 41, no. 4, dispatching rules for complex shop floor scenarios: A genetic pro-
pp.1110–1123,Aug.2011. grammingapproach,”inProc.ACMGenet.Evol.Comput.Conf.,2010,
[53] Y.-H. Jia, Y. Mei, and M. Zhang, “A bilevel ant colony optimization pp.257–264.
algorithmforcapacitatedelectricvehicleroutingproblem,”IEEETrans. [76] T. Hildebrandt and J. Branke, “On using surrogates with genetic
Cybern.,earlyaccess,Apr.20,2021,doi:10.1109/TCYB.2021.3069942. programming,”Evol.Comput.,vol.23,no.3,pp.343–367,2015.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WANGetal.:GENETICPROGRAMMINGWITHNICHINGFORUNCERTAINCAPACITATEDARCROUTINGPROBLEM 87
[77] E. K. Burke, M. Hyde, G. Kendall, and J. Woodward, “A genetic Mengjie Zhang (Fellow, IEEE) received the
programming hyper-heuristic approach for evolving 2-D strip packing B.E. and M.E. degrees from Artificial Intelligence
heuristics,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 14, no. 6, pp.942–958, Research Center, Agricultural University of Hebei,
Dec.2010. Baoding,China,in1989and1992,respectively,and
[78] E.K.Burke,M.R.Hyde,G.Kendall,andJ.Woodward,“Automating the Ph.D. degree in computer science from RMIT
thepackingheuristicdesignprocesswithgeneticprogramming,”Evol. University,Melbourne,VIC,Australia,in2000.
Comput.,vol.20,no.1,pp.63–89,2012. HeiscurrentlyaProfessorofComputerScience,
[79] S. Luke et al. (2006). ECJ: A Java-Based Evolutionary Computation theHeadoftheEvolutionaryComputationResearch
Research System. [Online]. Available: http://cs.gmu.edu/eclab/ Group, and the Associate Dean (Research and
projects/ecj Innovation)withtheFacultyofEngineering,Victoria
UniversityofWellington,Wellington,NewZealand.
He has published over 500 research papers in refereed international jour-
nals and conferences. His current research interests include evolutionary
computation,particularlygeneticprogramming,particleswarmoptimization,
Shaolin Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) and learning classifier systems with application areas of image analysis,
receivedtheB.Sc.degreeingeographicinformation multiobjectiveoptimization,featureselectionandreduction,job-shopschedul-
system from Nanning Normal University, Nanning, ing,andtransferlearning.
China,in2012,thePostgraduateDiplomadegreein Prof. Zhang was the Chair of the IEEE CIS Intelligent Systems and
geographic information system from the University Applications Technical Committee, the IEEE CIS Emergent Technologies
of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, in 2014, the Technical Committee, and the Evolutionary Computation Technical
GraduateDiplomadegreeincomputersciencefrom Committee and a member of the IEEE CIS Award Committee. He is the
the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Vice-Chair of the Task Force on Evolutionary Computer Vision and Image
Zealand, in 2016, and the master’s degree in Processing and the Founding Chair of the IEEE Computational Intelligence
computer science from the Victoria University of Chapter in New Zealand. He is also a Committee Member of the IEEE NZ
Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand, in 2019, CentralSection.HeisaFellowoftheRoyalSocietyofNewZealandandan
where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of IEEEDistinguishedLecturer.
EngineeringandComputerScience.
His research interests are artificial intelligence, evolutionary computation,
hyper-heuristic,routing,andreal-worldoptimisation.
Xin Yao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree
from the University of Science and Technology of
China (USTC), Hefei, China, in 1982, the M.Sc.
Yi Mei (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. degreefromtheNorthChinaInstituteofComputing
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science Technologies,Sanhe,China,in1985,andthePh.D.
andTechnologyofChina,Hefei,China,in2005and degreefromUSTCin1990.
2010,respectively. He is the Chair Professor of Computer Science
HeiscurrentlyaSeniorLecturerwiththeSchool with the Southern University of Science and
of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria Technology, Shenzhen, China, and a Part-Time
UniversityofWellington,Wellington,NewZealand. Professor of Computer Science with the University
Hisresearchinterestsincludeevolutionaryschedul- of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K. His major
ing and combinatorial optimisation, machine learn- research interests include evolutionary computation, ensemble learning, and
ing,geneticprogramming,andhyper-heuristics. theirapplicationstosoftwareengineering.
Dr.MeiservesastheVice-ChairoftheIEEECIS Dr.Yaoreceivedthe2012RoyalSocietyWolfsonResearchMeritAward,
Emergent Technologies Technical Committee and a member of Intelligent the2013IEEECISEvolutionaryComputationPioneerAward,andthe2020
Systems Applications Technical Committee. He is an editorial board mem- IEEE Frank Rosenblatt Award. His work won the 2001 IEEE Donald G.
ber/associate editor of four International Journals, and a guest editor of a Fink Prize Paper Award; 2010, 2016, and 2017 IEEE TRANSACTIONSON
specialissueoftheGeneticProgrammingEvolvableMachine.Heservesasa EVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATIONOutstandingPaperAwards;the2011IEEE
reviewer of over 30 international journals. He has over 130 fully referred TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS Outstanding Paper Award; the
publications, including the top journals in EC and Operations Research, 2010BTGordonRadleyAwardforBestAuthorofInnovation(Finalist);and
such as IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION, IEEE manyotherbestpaperawardsatconferences.HeservedasthePresidentfrom
TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, Evolutionary Computation, European 2014to2015ofIEEECISandtheEditor-in-Chieffrom2003to2008ofIEEE
Journal of Operational Research, and ACM Transactions on Mathematical TRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION.HeisaDistinguished
Software. LectureroftheIEEEComputationalIntelligenceSociety.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 08:52:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
