IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.27,NO.2,APRIL2023 311
Knowledge Transfer Genetic Programming With
Auxiliary Population for Solving Uncertain
Capacitated Arc Routing Problem
Mazhar Ansari Ardeh , Yi Mei , Senior Member, IEEE, Mengjie Zhang , Fellow, IEEE,
and Xin Yao , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The uncertain capacitated arc routing problem As an extension of CARP, UCARP is also NP-hard [6], [7]
(UCARP) is an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem and, the uncertain nature of UCARP increases the difficulty
with a wide range of applications in logistics domains. Genetic
even further, as the solution may become worse or infeasi-
programming(GP)hyper-heuristichasbeensuccessfullyapplied
ble when the actual environment is different from expected.
to evolve routing policies to effectively handle the uncertain
environment in this problem. The real world usually encoun- Traditional optimization algorithms, such as mathematical
ters different but related instances due to events, such as season programming and genetic algorithms cannot solve UCARP
change and vehicle breakdowns, and it is desirable to transfer effectively [8], since the preplanned solutions are not flexible
knowledgegainedfromsolvingoneinstancetohelpsolveanother
enough and may incur large recourse cost in some situations.
related one. However, the solutions found by the GP process
Incontrast,geneticprogramming(GP)isapromisingapproach
can lack diversity, and the existing methods use the transferred
knowledge mainly during initialization. Thus, they cannot suffi- to solving UCARP [8], [9]. One of the primary advantages
cientlyhandlethechangefromthesourcetothetargetinstance. of using GP is to evolve routing policies instead of actual
Toaddressthisissue,wedevelopanovelknowledgetransferGP routes themselves. Such an indirect method for routing pro-
with an auxiliary population. In addition to the main popula-
vides much better flexibility and applicability of policies in
tion for the target instance, we initialize an auxiliary population
uncertain environments. GP has shown to outperform exist-
usingthetransferredknowledgeandevolveitalongsidethemain
population. We develop a novel scheme to carefully exchange ingproactivemethods[10]andotherpolicylearningmethods,
the knowledge between the two populations, and a surrogate including linear models and neural networks [11], due to its
modeltoevaluatetheauxiliarypopulationefficiently.Theexper- flexible representation, and low demand on the amount of
imental results confirm that the proposed method performed
trainingdata.GPHHhasshowntooutperformotherrobustness
significantlybetterthanthestate-of-the-artGPapproachesfora
optimization methods [10] and other policy learning methods,
wide range of uncertain arc routing instances, in terms of both
final performance and convergence speed. including linear models and neural networks [11], due to its
flexibilityandlowdemandontheamountoftrainingdata[11].
IndexTerms—Arcrouting,geneticprogramming(GP),hyper-
The effectiveness of routing policies is sensitive to the
heuristics, transfer optimization.
characteristics of the UCARP instance (e.g., graph topology,
number of vehicles, and distributions of the random vari-
ables), and can dramatically deteriorate even with a slight
I. INTRODUCTION
change, such as adding/removing one vehicle in the same
THE UNCERTAIN capacitated arc routing problem UCARP instance [9]. Therefore, new routing policies have to
(UCARP) is an important optimization problem [1], [2] be retrained after every slight change in the UCARP instance.
that models a collection of vehicles that are assigned to serve In reality, problems rarely exist in isolation [12], [13].
a set of required edges in a graph. UCARP has important In the case of UCARP, different related instances could be
real-worldapplicationsinlogisticsystems,suchasroadmain- encountered when expanding the fleet size or a vehicle breaks
tenance [3], snow removal and ice control [4], and waste down, or changing from one season to another. Routing poli-
collection [5]. cies are an indirect and higher abstraction of actual routes.
Policies are not dependent on any particular maps and hence
Manuscript received 27 August 2021; revised 6 January 2022 are a better representation of knowledge about good routing
and 27 February 2022; accepted 5 April 2022. Date of publication by ignoring details specific to any particular map. Policies
21April2022;dateofcurrentversion31March2023.(Correspondingauthor:
can capture knowledge (e.g., subtree structures or probability
MazharAnsariArdeh.)
Mazhar Ansari Ardeh, Yi Mei, and Mengjie Zhang are with the School models) transferable across different problem instances bet-
of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, ter. Therefore, it is desirable to develop transfer optimization
Wellington6012,NewZealand(e-mail:mazhar@ecs.vuw.ac.nz).
techniques [13] to improve the effectiveness and efficiency by
Xin Yao is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
SouthernUniversityofScienceandTechnology,Shenzhen518055,China. discovering and transferring the knowledge in the policies for
This article has supplementary material provided by the previous related UCARP instances.
authors and color versions of one or more figures available at
GP-based transfer learning and optimization has been
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2022.3169289.
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/TEVC.2022.3169289 applied to a range of problems, including symbolic
1089-778X(cid:2)c 2022IEEE.Personaluseispermitted,butrepublication/redistributionrequiresIEEEpermission.
Seehttps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.htmlformoreinformation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
312 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.27,NO.2,APRIL2023
regression [14], [15] and UCARP [16], [17]. However, II. BACKGROUND
previous studies have found that the GP process can lose its
A. Uncertain Capacitated Arc Routing Problem
populationdiversity[16],[18],[19].Forexample,thefinalGP
The static CARP [6], [7] aims to find a set of routes to
population can contain many duplicated individuals with the
serveacollectionofrequirededges(tasks)inagraphG(V,E).
same (good) fitness and common building blocks (i.e., sub-
Initially, all the vehicles are stationed at a depot node. Each
trees). The existing knowledge transfer methods that simply
edge e∈E has a demand d(e), indicating the amount of work
transfer knowledge from the top individuals tend to transfer
tobedonetotheedge.Ifd(e)>0,theneisalsocalledatask.
many duplicated building blocks, and make the GP search in
The task set is denoted as E ⊆ E. Serving a task e incurs a
thetargetinstanceeasilystuckintopoorlocaloptima.Inaddi- T
serving cost sc(e) > 0. Traversing an edge e without serving
tion, the existing GP-based transfer learning and optimization
it will incur a deadheading cost dc(e) > 0. Each vehicle has
methods are mostly limited to reusing the transferred build-
a limited capacity of the demand q.
ing blocks (e.g., subtrees or tree structure) to initialize the
By taking into account the uncertain environment, in
target population [16], [17], [19]–[22] which leads to a trade-
UCARP, the demand of each task e ∈ E is a random vari-
off to consider. On the one hand, the use of the building T
able D(e), and the deadheading cost of each edge e ∈ E is
blockscanhelptheGPprocessstartfromabetter-than-random
a random variable DC(e). Due to the random task demands
initial population. On the other hand, the initial population
and deadheading costs, the following two types of failure can
may be too restricted in the local region of the transferred
occur when executing a solution in UCARP.
individuals,especiallywhentheyhavemanyduplicatedbuild-
1) A route failure occurs if the actual demand of the next
ing blocks due to the loss of diversity. As a result, the
served task is larger than expected, and exceeds the
GP search for the target instance can hardly jump out of
remaining capacity of the vehicle. The route needs to
the initial local region to find better regions for the target
be repaired by going back to the depot to replenish.
instance.
2) An edge failure occurs when the next edge becomes
To address the above issues, we aim to propose a novel
GP-based transfer optimization algorithm to evolve routing inaccessible(deadheadingcostbecomesinfinity).Inthis
policies for UCARP. The new algorithm is named as GP case, a detour needs to be found.
with auxiliary population for knowledge transfer (APTGP). A UCARP instance can be denoted as a tuple I =
In our algorithm, all the individuals evaluated for solving the (cid:5)G,D(·),sc(·),DC(·),q(cid:6), where G is the graph, D(·) indicates
source problem form the pool of transferred knowledge. To the random task demands, sc(·) represents the deterministic
fight off the issue of diversity loss, APTGP clears duplicate serving costs, DC(·) indicates the random deadheading costs,
individuals from the knowledge pool and utilizes the cleared and q is the capacity.
pool to initialize the GP population for solving the target Note that a UCARP instance contains a number of random
problem. Furthermore, after the initialization, the transferred variables, and can generate a large (if not infinite) number of
knowledge is utilized to help GP handle the issue of diver- instance samples by sampling a value for each random vari-
sity loss during the process of solving the target problem. For able. Given a UCARP instance I = (cid:5)G,D(·),sc(·),DC(·),q(cid:6),
this purpose, the transferred pool is preserved as a second we denote the instance sample Iξ =(cid:5)G,dξ (·),sc(·),dcξ (·),q(cid:6),
auxiliary population that evolves alongside the main popu- where dξ (e) (dcξ (e)) is the sampled demand (deadheading
lation based on a surrogate model that is learned from and cost) of e using the random seed ξ.
update by the main population. The main purpose of the A UCARP instance Iξ looks similar to a static CARP
auxiliary population is to help GP maintain its population instance. The main difference is that in Iξ, the sampled val-
diversity and for this matter, we devise an elaborate immi- uesdξ (·)and dcξ (·)areunknown during theoptimization, but
grantexchangemechanismbetweenthemainandtheauxiliary gradually realized during the execution process as follows.
populations. 1) Thesampleddemandofataskdξ (e)isrealizedafterthe
Hence, our research objectives in this article are as follows. task is served.
1) To handle the potential presence of duplicates in the 2) The sampled deadheading cost of an edge dcξ (e) is
transferred knowledge, we develop a new initialization realized after the edge is traversed.
mechanism that removes duplicates from the knowl- A solution to a UCARP instance I is denoted as a mapping
edge pool and transfers unique individuals in the GP h (·), which can generate a feasible solution S = h (ξ) for
I Iξ I
for UCARP. each instance sample Iξ. Here, a solution S
Iξ
is feasible if it
2) To reuse the transferred knowledge after the initializa- satisfies the following constraints.
tion phase, we propose a mechanism for adapting the C1: Each route starts and ends at the depot.
transferredknowledgetothetargetUCARPproblemand C2: Each task is served exactly once by one vehicle. An
reusing it more efficiently. exception is that when route failure occurs, the failed
3) To prevent the GP for UCARP from losing its vehicle returns to the depot to replenish in the middle
population diversity, we devise an elaborate immi- of the service, and then resumes the remaining service.
grant exchange mechanism between the main and the C3: The total demand served between two adjacent depot
auxiliary populations that reduces duplicates in the visits cannot exceed its capacity q.
population. Below are two examples of possible UCARP solutions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ANSARIARDEHetal.:KNOWLEDGETRANSFERGPWITHAUXILIARYPOPULATION 313
1) A UCARP solution can contain a preplanned robust powerfulsearchmechanismthathasbeensuccessfullyapplied
solution S along with a recourse operator RO(·) that to various problems [14], [30]. Since computer heuristics are
I
transforms S
I
to a feasible solution for each sample Iξ. computer programs in nature, GP can be utilized as a hyper
In this case, h
I
(ξ)=RO(S
I
,Iξ ). heuristics (GPHHs) for evolving them automatically.
2) The UCARP solution can be a routing policy RP(·) UCARProutingpoliciesarebasicallymathematicalexpres-
that generates a feasible solution for each sample Iξ sionsthatareusedasheuristicsforbuildingUCARPsolutions.
by making real-time reactive decisions. In this case, Liu and Mei [8] proposed a GPHH based on a tree-based
h
I
(ξ) = RP(Iξ ). In this study, a UCARP solution is GP to evolve routing policies for a single vehicle. Mei and
represented as a routing policy. Zhang [9] extended [8] to evolve routing policies for multiple
UCARPistofindasolutionh (·)thatcangeneratefeasible vehicles. MacLachlan et al. [10] showed that allowing collab-
I
solutions for all possible samples Iξ, and the expected total orationsbetweenthevehiclescanimprovetheperformanceof
cost is minimized. It can be stated as follows: the evolved policies. Wang et al. [31]–[33] proposed methods
to evolve effective and small (thus potentially more inter-
min E[tc(h (ξ))|ξ ∈(cid:3)] (1)
hI (·)∈H I (·) I pretable)routingpoliciesforUCARP.Liuetal.[34]combined
s.t.: h (ξ)satisfies constraints (C1)–(C3) (2) the reactive and proactive approaches in which the proactive
I
component of the algorithm evolves the sequence of vehicle
where H (·) is the domain of possible UCARP solutions.
I routesandthereactivecomponentevolvesaroutingpolicythat
h
I
(ξ) = S
Iξ
is the feasible solution for Iξ, and (cid:3) is a set
navigates the vehicle to the depot in case of route failures.
of unseen test samples of the possible future situation.
3) Evolutionary Transfer Optimization: Problems rarely
It may seem that there exist some degree of similarity
exist in isolation [13]. Most often, a family of problems share
betweenUCARPandthebodyofdynamicoptimizationprob-
some common properties, generally referred to as knowledge.
lems [23], [24]. Nevertheless, the characteristic property of
In the EA domain, transfer optimization methods are a set of
dynamic optimization problems is that these problems change
algorithms that aim at benefiting from this fact by extracting
with time [23], [24]. UCARP, however, does not have a time-
thecommonknowledgefromapreviouslysolvedproblemand
dependent component and hence, it does not belong to the set
reusing it to solve related problems more effectively [13].
of dynamic problems.
Intransferoptimization,theconceptofknowledgeisusually
defined based on the problem to solve and the algorithm to
B. Related Work
use.Inearlytransferoptimizationattempts,theknowledgewas
1) MethodsforUCARP: Theexistingapproachesforsolv- defined as the genetic materials that were discovered during
ing UCARP can be divided into the proactive and reactive thecourseofsolvingthesourceproblem.Consequently,trans-
methods. The proactive algorithms [1], [25]–[27] focus on fer optimization was performed with the injection of genetic
finding the direct routes that demonstrate the best robust- materials into the population of the algorithm that searches
ness. These methods take the environmental uncertainties into for the solutions of the target problem. Koçer and Arslan [35]
account indirectly, and find the routes based on some robust- proposed a method, called GATL, that selected the best and
ness measures. The reactive approaches [8], [9], on the other median individuals found at each generation of the source to
hand, utilize routing policies that can create the solutions in initializethetargetEA.Dinhetal.[21]devisedthreeinjection
real time and hence, react more flexibly to the uncertainties. methods that selected some genetic materials from a source
A routing policy is a mathematical function that can calcu- population to initialize k% of the target GP. Their FullTree
latethepriorityofeachunservedtaskbasedontheinformation selects the best individuals of the source final population. In
about the state of tasks, vehicles, and the environment. With BestGen, the best individuals of each source generation are
the help of a routing policy, it is fairly straightforward to con- chosen. The SubTree method considers the final source pop-
struct UCARP solutions in real time. At first, all vehicles are ulation and selects a root subtree of individuals randomly as
idle and stationed at the depot. Whenever a vehicle becomes the transferable genetic material.
idle,itconsidersthesetofavailabletasks,calculatestheirpri- Subtrees are also effective transferable knowledge.
orities, and selects the tasks with the highest priority to serve Particularly, Iqbal et al. [36] proposed the TLGPC algorithm
next. As the vehicle serves the selected task, it may encounter that considered the high-quality solutions of the source
edge and route failures which it needs to handle appropriately domain and extracted their subtrees into a pool. For ini-
untilthetaskisserved.Atthispoint,thevehiclebecomesidle. tializing the target problem, the individual’s root subtree
Ifallthetasksareserved,thenthevehiclereturnstothedepot was either selected created randomly or selected from the
and a complete solution is obtained; otherwise, the process of pool. Also, for mutating an individual, a randomly selected
selecting and serving tasks is repeated [8]. Since routing poli- subtree of the individual was either replaced with a subtree
cies are heuristics that generate the final solutions, GP can be created randomly or a subtree from the pool. While most of
utilized as a hyper-heuristic to evolve them automatically. the aforementioned methods selected transferable subtrees
2) Genetic Programming Hyper Heuristics: GP evolves a randomly or based on the fitness of their individuals, other
population of computer programs, abstracted as mathemati- methods defined an importance measure for selecting the
cal expressions, iteratively [28], [29]. It first creates an initial subtrees [16], [37].
population of programs randomly. Then, it repeatedly creates Another approach to knowledge transfer is to learn a
newindividualswiththecrossover,mutation,andreproduction structure that models important information about the source
operators, until some stopping criteria are met. GP is a problem. Such model-based algorithms then utilize the
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
314 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.27,NO.2,APRIL2023
Algorithm 1: Proposed APTGP
Input:K S:routingpoliciesexaminedbyGPforthesourceinstance
Input:Ig:thetargetUCARPinstancetosolve
Input:Parametersηandϑ
∗
Output:rp :thebestroutingpolicyforthetargetinstance
// Initialisation
1
K
uni
,K
dup
=PhenotypicSplit(K
S
);
2 pop1 =K uni[1:popsize]; // main population
3
4
p
r
o
p
p ∗2
=
=
n
K
ul
u
l
n
,
i
g
[1
en
:
=
po
0
p
;
size]; // auxiliary population
// Search loop
5
whilegen<MaxGendo
6 Evaluateth
∗
eroutingpoliciesinpop1;
Fig.1. APTGPframework. 7 Updaterp withpop1;
8 UpdatethesurrogatemodelΥ withpop1;
9 Evaluatetheroutingpoliciesinpop2 usingthesurrogateΥ;
10 (cid:7) 1 =Immigrants(pop1 ,η); // Select immigrants
extracted model to guide the evolution for solving the tar-
11
(cid:7)
2
=Immigrants(pop2 ,η);
get problem. In [38]–[40], the model is an autoencoder [41] /* Breeding with standard GP crossover,
mutation and reproduction */
that maps the search space of a source to that of a target 12 pop1 =Breed(pop1 );
problem. In [42] and [43], the model is defined as a pos- 13 pop2 =Breed(pop2 );
itive semi-definite matrix that provides a mapping between // Exchange Knowledge
problem instances and their solutions. The probability distri- 1 1 4 5 p p o o p p 1 2 = = E E x x c c h h a a n n g g e e I I m m m m i i g g r r a a n n t t s s ( ( p p o o p p 1 2 , , (cid:7) (cid:7) 2 1 , , η η , , ϑ ϑ ) ) ; ;
butions of the good source solutions are also capable models
16
gen=gen+1;
for transferring useful knowledge [18], [20], [44], [45]. 17 end
∗
Ardehetal.[16]werethefirsttoapplytransferoptimization 18 returnrp ;
for solving UCARP who analyzed the performance of sev-
eral existing methods, as well as their own algorithm. They
observed that the existence of duplicates and possible con-
vergence to local optima of the source problem can have source instance. In this study, we consider that the knowledge
a significant negative impact on the effectiveness of knowl- simplyincludesalltheexaminedroutingpoliciesbyGPwhen
edge transfer. This finding was later confirmed in [18]–[20] solving the source instance. Additionally, APTGP is based on
and [46]. Consequently and to increase the diversity in the theassumptionthatthesourceandtargetproblemsarerelated.
pooloftransferredknowledge,Ardehetal.[17],[47]proposed Tosolvethetargetinstance,APTGPfirstinitializesthemain
the SUFullTree algorithm that achieved a significant improve- and auxiliary populations using the transferred knowledge, in
ment in the effectiveness of knowledge transfer by learning ordertohaveabetter-than-randominitialpopulation.Then,the
a surrogate model [48]–[50] from the source solutions, cre- main and auxiliary populations are evolved in parallel. Since
ating a large pool of unique individuals that were created theauxiliarypopulationaimstoassisttheevolutionofthemain
from the good transferred individuals, evaluating them with population, all the individuals in the auxiliary population are
the surrogate, and selecting the best ones for transfer. evaluated by surrogate. Here, we use the KNN surrogate [49],
The act of knowledge sharing for solving related prob- which will be described in Section III-D.
lems is also a fundamental part of multitask optimization At each generation, the individuals in the main popula-
(MTO)[13],[51]whichsolvesmultiplerelatedtaskstogether. tion are first evaluated with the full evaluation (i.e., UCARP
Gupta et al. [51] and Feng [52] first proposed a multifactorial simulations). Then, the surrogate model is updated by the
evolutionary algorithm (MFEA) to solve multiple tasks with a newlyevaluatedindividuals.Afterwards,theindividualsinthe
single population, which shares knowledge implicitly through auxiliary population are evaluated using the updated surro-
the crossover operator between individuals solving different gate. Then, the two populations select immigrants and breed
tasks. This work was extended later by Bali et al. [53]. offspring using the standard tree-based crossover, mutation,
Zhou et al. [54] improved MFEA by proposing an adap- and reproduction operators [28]. Finally, the information is
tive knowledge sharing mechanism. Feng et al. [55] proposed exchangedbetweenthepopulationsbysendingtheimmigrants
an MTO algorithm for solving CARP using autoencoders. from one population to the other. As a result, the main differ-
Zhong et al. [56] incorporated MFEA with GP to solve sym- ence between themain andauxiliary populations isthefitness
bolic regression problems. Ardeh et al. [57] developed a evaluation, as well as the individuals within them.
multitask GP for solving multiple related UCARP scenarios The pseudocode of APTGP is presented in Algorithm 1.
together. In addition to the common GP parameters, APTGP has two
parameters η and ϑ for knowledge exchange. For initializa-
tion, the routing policies in K are first split into the subsets
III. PROPOSEDALGORITHM
of unique routing policies K
S
and duplicated policies K ,
uni dup
A. Overall Framework
based on their phenotypic behaviors (details are given in
Fig.1presentstheoverallframeworkofAPTGP.Theinputs Section III-C). Then, the main pop and auxiliary populations
1
of the algorithm include the target UCARP instance to be pop are both initialized with the best popsize unique routing
2
solved, as well as the knowledge gained from solving the policies. Since there are a large number of routing policies in
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ANSARIARDEHetal.:KNOWLEDGETRANSFERGPWITHAUXILIARYPOPULATION 315
Algorithm 2: S
Iξ
=rp(Iξ )
Input:rp:aroutingpolicy
Input:Iξ:aUCARPinstancesample
Output:SIξ :afeasiblesolution
1 Allvehiclesareatthedepot,alltaskareunserved;
2 whilenotalltasksareserved do
∗
3 Findtheearliestidlevehicleveh (breakthetierandomly);
4 FindalltheunservedtasksE T ∗ whosee ∗ xpecteddemanddonot
exceedtheremainingcapacityofveh ;
5 fortaske∈E T ∗ do
6
Calculatethepriorityvaluerp(e);
F te i r g iz . a 2 t . ion. Example of the path-scanning heuristic and its phenotypic charac- 7 8 e S n e d lectnexttaske ∗=argmin e∈E∗rp(e);
∗ ∗ T
9 Sendveh toservee ;
K (e.g.,50generationsand1024routingpoliciespergenera- 10 Repairifroute/edgefailuroccurs;
S
11 end
tion), it is safe to assume that there are always enough unique
12 returnthegeneratedsolution;
routing policies in K .
S
At each generation, the two populations are first evalu-
ated using the full simulations and surrogate, respectively, Algorithm 3: PhenotypicSplit(RP)
∗
and the best routing policy rp is updated by the best Input:RP:asetofroutingpolicies
individual in pop
1
. Then, the immigrants (cid:7)
1
and (cid:7)
2
for Output:RP uni:theuniqueroutingpolicies
the two populations are selected (details in Section III-E).
Output:RP dup:theduplicatedroutingpolicies
1
RP
uni
=∅,RP
dup
=∅;
After that, the new populations are generated by the stan-
2
RP=SortByFitness(RP);
dardGPbreedingprocess.Specifically,oneortwoparentsare 3 forroutingpolicyrp∈RP do
selected from the population by the size-7 tournament selec- 4
Calculatethephenotypicbehaviorb(rp);
5
Calculatethehashvalueh(rp)=Hash(b(rp));
tion, and the tree-based crossover, mutation, or reproduction 6 ifh(rp)(cid:9)=h(rp (cid:10)),∀rp (cid:10)∈RP uni then
operator is applied to the parents to generate the offspring. 7 RP uni =RP uni ∪{rp};
Finally, the two populations exchange knowledge with each 8 else
other by the ExchangeImmigrants() function (details in 9
RP
dup
=RP
dup
∪{rp};
10 end
Section III-F). 11 end
12 returnRP uni,RP dup;
B. Representation and Fitness Function
In APTGP, a routing policy is represented as a tree, which
is essentially a priority function. Fig. 2 shows an example this, K S is first split into the subsets of unique and duplicated
routing policy 105 × CFH − DEM/SC, where CFH is the routing policies based on their phenotypic behaviors, by the
cost from the current location to the candidate task, DEM PhenotypicSplit() function, described in Algorithm 3.
is the expected demand of the candidate task, and SC is the Note that it takes any set of routing policies as input, and is
servingcostofthecandidatetask.Thisexampleroutingpolicy used by the ExchangeImmigrants() function as well.
is the well-known path-scanning heuristic [58], which selects 1) Phenotypic Characterization: In Algorithm 3, the rout-
the task closest to the current location, and selects the task ingpoliciesinRP arefirstsortedbyfitness.Here,RP =K S ,
with the smallest demand over serving cost to break the tie. and we use the source fitness for the sorting. Then, we cal-
The fitness function of a routing policy is defined based on culate the phenotypic behavior vector b(rp) for each routing
a set of training instance samples (cid:3) . Based on (1), the policy. This calculation is similar to the phenotypic charac-
train
fitness function is defined as terization in [49], which characterizes a routing policy by its
(cid:2) selectedtasksinarangeofdecisionsituations(cid:2).Fig.2shows
1
fit(rp)= tc(rp(Iξ )) (3) anexampleofthecharacterizationofapolicyusingthreedeci-
|(cid:3) |
train ξ∈(cid:3) train sion situations (cid:2) = {(cid:8) 1 ,(cid:8) 2 ,(cid:8) 3 }. The first situation has two
candidate tasks ((cid:8) and (cid:8) ), the second has two ((cid:8) and
where the solution S
Iξ
=rp(Iξ ) is generated by Algorithm 2.
(cid:8) ), and the third
11
contains
1
t
2
hree ((cid:8) , (cid:8) and (cid:8) ).
2
B
1
ased
It is a simulation of applying the routing policy to an instance 22 31 32 33
on the attributes of the tasks, we can see that the indices of
sample to generate a solution. Initially, all the vehicles are
the tasks selected by the routing policy in the situations are 2,
at the depot, and all the tasks are unserved. Once a vehicle
1, and 3. This forms the phenotypic vector [2,1,3].
becomesidle,theroutingpolicycalculatesthepriorityofeach
Knowledge transfer can be very expensive if not done
unserved task that is expected to be feasible, and selects the
carefully [59], [60]. The complexity of Algorithm 3 depends
next task based on the priority. The simulation stops when all
on the sorting operation (line 2) and the main loop
the tasks are served, and all the vehicles return to the depot.
(lines 3–11). As a sorting algorithm, SortByFitness has
a time complexity of O(|RP)|log(|RP)|)). During the main
C. Initialization
loop,thecomplexityofeachiterationisdominatedbythephe-
Themainandauxiliarypopulationsareinitializedbythetop notypic characterization (line 4), whose complexity is O(|(cid:2)|).
unique routing policies from the source knowledge K . For If RP is implemented with a hash set data structure, then
S uni
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
316 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.27,NO.2,APRIL2023
Algorithm 4: Hash(b) Algorithm 6: ExchangeImmigrants(pop,(cid:7),η,ϑ)
Input:Abehaviourvectorb Input:pop:thegoalpopulation
Output:Thehashvalueofthebehaviourvector Input:(cid:7):theimmigrantsfromthesourcepopulation
1
h=1; Input:η:numberofimmigrants
2
fori=1→|b|doh=h<<5−h+bi; Input:ϑ:numberoftrials
3 returnh; Output:Thenewgoalpopulationpop
// Select individuals to be replaced in pop
1
uni,dup=PhenotypicSplit(pop);
Algorithm 5: Immigrants(pop,η) 2 3 r w e h p i l l a e ce |r d ep = la d c u e p d ; |<ηdo
// Common tournament size for GP is 7
Input:pop:apopulationofroutingpolicies
Input:η:numberofimmigrants 4 Randomlyselect7individualsfromuni;
Output:(cid:7):theimmigrantsfrompop 5 Addtheworstselectedindividualintoreplaced;
1 2 (cid:7) wh = ile ∅ | ; (cid:7)|<ηdo 6 7 e re n p d laced=ReverseSortByFitness(replaced);
// Common tournament size for GP is 7 // Refine the immigrants
3 4 5 6 e re n t d ur R A n a d n (cid:7) d d ; t o h m e l b y e s s e t l s e e c l t e 7 cte in d d i i n v d id iv u i a d l u s a f l ro in m to p (cid:7) op ; ; 1 1 1 0 1 2 8 9 (cid:7) for (cid:10)= i f = o ∅ r ; 1 tr i → f ie ∃ s r η = (cid:7) p d [ 1 ∈ o i] → u = ni ϑ M , u h d t ( o (cid:7) at [i e ]) ((cid:7) = [ h i] ( ) r ; p)then
13
Calculatethephenotypicbehaviourb((cid:7)[i]);
14
Calculatethehashvalueh((cid:7)[i])=Hash(b((cid:7)[i]));
15 else
the uniqueness check at line 6 has a complexity of O(1), the 16 (cid:7)(cid:10)=(cid:7)(cid:10)∪{(cid:7)[i]};
complexity of the main loop is O(|RP)|·|(cid:2)|). Considering 17 break;
that usually log(|RP|) (cid:14) |(cid:2)|. Thus, the complexity of 18 end
19 end
Algorithm 3 is O(|RP)|log(|RP)|). 20 end
2) Hashing for Duplicate Checking: For duplicate check- // Transfer immigrants
21
replaced[1:|(cid:7)(cid:10)|]=(cid:7)(cid:10)
;
ing, we need to compare the phenotypic vectors between
22 returnpop;
routing policies, which can be time consuming if a larger
number of decision situations are used to capture the behav-
iors of the routing policy accurately. To handle this issue, we
create a hash value for each behavior vector, and use this
F. Knowledge Exchange
single hash value for the duplicate checking. Here, we use
Afterbreeding,themainandauxiliarypopulationsexchange
the well known LSHash function [61], which is given in
knowledge by transferring the selected immigrants to each
Algorithm 4. Given a behavior vector b, LSHash calculates
other.Whentransferring,thefollowingtwofactorsareconsid-
the hash value using the formula in line 2, where << is the
ered: 1) to maintain diversity, the immigrants should not be a
bitwiseleft-shiftoperator.TheHashfunctionhasatimecom-
duplicate in the goal population and 2) the immigrants should
plexity of O(|(cid:2)|), which depends on the number of decision
replace the less useful individuals in the goal population.
situations.
Algorithm 6 shows the pseudocode of the knowledge
exchange. First, it splits the goal population pop into the
D. Surrogate Model for Auxiliary Population unique (uni) and duplicated individuals (dup). The individuals
We use the KNN-based surrogate model [49] to estimate to be replaced (replaced) is first set to all the duplicated indi-
the fitness of the individuals in the auxiliary population. viduals, as they are expected to contribute little to the popula-
Specifically, the surrogate model Υ = {(b : fit)} contains the tion. If there are not enough duplicates (i.e., |replaced|<η),
pairs of phenotypic behavior vector and fitness. The surrogate we fill in the remaining places by the size-7 reverse tour-
fitnessofaroutingpolicyisassignedasthefitnesscorrespond- nament selection to uni. Then, we sort replaced by fitness
ing to the phenotypic vector in Υ, which is closest to that of fromworsttobest[ReverseSortByFitness()].Notethat
the routing policy based on the Euclidean distance. ExchangeImmigrants() is called between the breeding
Initially, Υ is set to empty. In each generation, after and evaluation, and the newly generated individuals are not
evaluating pop , all the phenotypically unique individu- evaluated yet. In this case, we simply use the fitness inherited
1
als in pop will be added into Υ. The maximal size of from the parent for the sorting.
2
Υ is 2 × popsize. If the number of elements exceeds Next, the immigrants are refined to make sure they are not
the maximal size, Υ is trimmed by removing the oldest duplicatesofthegoalpopulation.Foreachimmigrant,ifitisa
elements. duplicateofthegoalpopulation,thenwemutateittogenerate
a different immigrant. We keep mutating the immigrant until
it becomes a nonduplicate or the maximal number of trials
E. Immigrants Selection ϑ is reached, and (cid:7) is refined to (cid:7)(cid:10) . Finally, we select the
Beforethebreeding,foreachpopulation,weselectη immi- worse individuals (either duplicates or worst fitness) in pop
grantspreparingtobetransferredtotheotherpopulation.Each and replace them with
(cid:7)(cid:10)
.
immigrant is selected by the size-7 tournament selection. The The time complexity of Algorithm 6 is dominated by the
pseudocode is shown in Algorithm 5. phenotypic split (line 1) and the operations in lines 9–20.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ANSARIARDEHetal.:KNOWLEDGETRANSFERGPWITHAUXILIARYPOPULATION 317
The phenotypic split has a complexity of O(|pop|log(|pop|), TABLEI
TRANSFERSCENARIOSUSEDINTHEEXPERIMENTS
and the operations in lines 9–20 have a complexity of
O(ηϑ|(cid:2)|). Thus, Algorithm 6 has a time complexity of
O(|pop|log(|pop|)+ηϑ|(cid:2)|).
Overall, the overhead of APTGP for knowledge transfer is
O(|RP|log(|RP|) + MaxGen · (|pop|log(|pop|) + ηϑ|(cid:2)|)).
This is much smaller than the complexity of GPHH, which
is O(MaxGen·|pop|·sim), where sim is the complexity of
the training simulations, which is typically much larger than
log(|pop|) and ηϑ|(cid:2)|.
G. Summary
The main idea of APTGP is to maintain two populations
in the target instance and interact with each other to improve
the search effectiveness. First, the main population is initial-
ized by the unique individuals from the source knowledge,
which can make the search start from a better region. Second,
the auxiliary population starts from the same region as the
main population, and evolves alongside the main population
but toward different directions (e.g., by using the surrogate
fitness). Third, the main population regularly receives nondu-
plicate immigrants from the auxiliary population, which can
help itjumpout of theinitiallocal region and handle thecon-
cept drift from the source to the target instance. Finally, the
main population migrates its best individuals to the auxiliary
populationtoinfluenceitssearchtowardthebestsolutionsthat
have been found so far.
It should be noted that our algorithm bears some simi-
larities with the cultural algorithms [62], [63]. However, the
cultural algorithms focuse on solving a single problem, while
APTGP focuses on transfer optimization and takes advantage
of the source individuals during the search process in the tar-
get problem. None of the populations in APTGP act as a
belief space like in the cultural algorithms, and the auxiliary
population in APTGP is evolved with a surrogate.
Finally,itisimportanttonotethat,despiteresemblingmul-
titask learning algorithms, the proposed algorithm does not
solve multiple problems at the same time. In this sense, the
APTGP method in this article is more similar to the works
by Ruan et al. [59], [60] in the sense that it assumes the
and a target instance. The last column “Sim.” (between −1
source task is solved first and therefore, the main and auxil-
and 1) indicates the similarity between the source and target
iary populations of APTGP are focused on solving one target
instances.Tocalculatethesimilarity,wegenerate1024unique
problem.
routing policies randomly, and evaluate them on both the
sourceandtargetinstances(200sampleseach).Thesimilarity
IV. EXPERIMENTSETUP
isthenmeasuredbyKendall’srankcorrelationcoefficient[64]
A. Datasets
between the fitness of the 1024 random individuals on the
Table I shows the source and target instances used sourceandtargetinstances.Ifthesimilarityiscloserto1,then
in the experiments. The UCARP instances are extended the source and target instances are more similar. It should be
from the well-known static CARP instances (converting noted that in practice, most UCARP instances are likely to be
the deterministic variables into random ones with normal relatedtoeachothersbecausealltheUCARPproblemsaimto
distribution), and have been commonly used in previous minimizethetotalcost,thustheyhavecommondesirablerout-
studies [8], [9], [16], [17]. Some of these datasets are based ing decisions such as selecting the nearest tasks. Therefore, it
onreal-worldroadnetworkfromLancashire,U.K.[10].Inthe is unlikely to have negative or very close to zero similarity
table,thepresenceofthedm1(dm2)suffixattheendofdataset values and hence, the scenarios in Table I present a diverse
name, e.g., Ugdb11dm2, highlights that the dataset is created range of similarity values.
by increasing the mean of the random demands by 1 (2). As shown in Table I, the experiments include source and
Each row is called a transfer scenario with a source instance target instances with varying similarities (from 0.46 to 0.99).
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
318 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.27,NO.2,APRIL2023
TABLEII TABLEIII
GPPARAMETERSETTINGS COMPAREDGPWITHKNOWLEDGETRANSFER
C. Compared Algorithms
The comparison is made with GPHH, since it has been
demonstrated to be a state-of-the-art approach for solv-
ing UCARP, even when considering non-GP methods [10].
Table III shows the state-of-the-art GP with knowledge trans-
fer compared in the experiments. It also briefly describes
the knowledge transfer mechanism of each algorithm. In the
paperswecomparedwith,theyhadcomparedthesealgorithms
against other methods from other groups [16], [21], [36] and
found them to be generally less effective. Hence, we did not
compare against them again in this article.
Notethatwehavecalculatedalargenumberofsourceandtar- V. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION
get instances, and most of them show decent similarities with
In this section, we compare different aspects of the APTGP
each other. A similarity of 0.46 is already a weak relatedness
performance against the set of existing methods. In order
between different UCARP instances.
to investigate how the proposed algorithm performs on test
datasets, we conduct experiments in Section V-A. To ana-
B. Parameter Settings lyze how the proposed algorithm affects the complexity of
the evolved policies, we investigate the GP tree sizes in
TableIIgivestheterminal,function,andGPparametersets
Section V-B. Finally, to the overhead of proposed knowledge
which are commonly used in literature [8], [9], [16], [17]. In
transfer we examine the training time of the algorithms in
the function set, the protected division returns 1 if divided by
zero. All the parameter settings in Table II, except η and ϑ, Section V-C.
are commonly used in literature of using GPHH for solving
A. Test Performance
UCARP [8], [9], [16], [17] and to remain consistent with the
previous studies, the values of these parameters are the same Table IV presents the test performance of the compared
as the previous studies. We conducted parameter sensitivity algorithms, where the best results are highlighted in boldface.
analysis on the two new η and ϑ parameters, and achieved As is evident, in almost all cases, APTGP had a best test
the best results with η =300 and ϑ =10. In Algorithm 3, a performance among the compared ones. The Friedman test is
set of decision situations is required for calculating the phe- alsoconductedtoverifystatisticalsignificance.Thecalculated
notypic behavior. For each scenario (a row in Table I), we rank and p-value are given in the bottom rows of Table IV.
apply the path scanning heuristic to a target instance sam- We can see that APTGP has the best rank and the p-value
ple and arbitrarily select 20 decision situations during the shows that the difference between the results is significant.
process. APTGP obtained the best mean test performance for all the
Foreachtransferscenario,thesourceinstanceisfirstsolved scenarios in the experiments. To pinpoint the difference, the
byrunningGPoncewiththesettinginTableII.Thisproduces Conover post-hoc analysis [65] is performed and the p-value
1024×50 = 51200 examined routing policies as the trans- of the pairwise comparisons is given in Table V after being
ferredknowledge.Then,werunAPTGP(orthecomparedGP adjustedwiththeBenjamini–Hochbergmethod[66].Thevery
with knowledge transfer) based on the transferred knowledge small p-values in the last column of the table show that the
on the target instance to train the routing policy. During the difference between APTGP and all other algorithm is signifi-
training, we use five instance samples, and rotate the samples cant and, considering its rank, this indicates its superiority to
ateachgenerationtoreduceoverfitting[8].Thetrainedrouting the other methods.
policy is then tested on 500 unseen samples. Each algorithm Upon investigating Table IV, it could be noted that APTGP
is run 30 times independently. has a larger variance on some problems which weakens
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ANSARIARDEHetal.:KNOWLEDGETRANSFERGPWITHAUXILIARYPOPULATION 319
TABLEIV
Fig.3presentstheconvergencecurveofthealgorithmsfora
TESTPERFORMANCEOF30INDEPENDENTRUNSOFTHE
COMPAREDALGORITHMS(MEAN±STD) fewscenarios.Asisevident,APTGPstartswithabetterinitial
stateandmanagestomaintainabetterperformancethroughout
the entire evolutionary process. We observed similar patterns
in almost all other scenarios. In Fig. 4, the distribution of the
fitness value of the solutions obtained with each algorithm
is given as violin plots for a few scenarios. It can be seen
that APTGP obtained the best (lowest) distributions. Similar
patterns were observed in other scenarios too.
B. Program Size
Fig. 5 presents the distribution of the program sizes (i.e.,
numberofnodesinthetree)inthefinalpopulationobtainedby
the compared algorithms, which indicate that APTGP evolved
larger trees (65 nodes on average versus 58 nodes by GPHH).
A possible reason for this could be that APTGP removes
duplicates from the GP population, which prevents the com-
putational resources from being wasted on evaluating the
duplicates. As a result, APTGP can spend the saved computa-
tional resources on discovering more effective policies, which
tend to be larger and more complex.
Fig. 6 presents an example of the evolved routing policies.
As is evident, the policy does not have a trivial size which
makesitdifficulttointerpretbutatthesametime,itrepresents
thecomplexityoftheprocessingitperformsonthestateofthe
environment. Nevertheless, it is possible to gain some high-
levelinsightsfromthispolicy.Inthispolicy,themostfrequent
terminals is CR (Cost to Refill). This indicates that this policy
considers this information about the environmental state to be
more important. This is consistent with our domain expertise
that during the course of serving tasks, a majority of the total
cost pertains to the cost returning to depot to refill.
C. Training Time
Fig.7presentsthesummaryofthetrainingtimeforeachof
theexaminedalgorithms.Accordingtothisfigure,thetraining
time of APTGP is slightly longer than the existing meth-
ods. In APTGP, the initialisation operator and the knowledge
exchange mechanism incur an additional computational cost
and hence, the increased training time is expected. However,
TABLEV the increment in time does not hinder the applicability of
POST-HOCCOMPARISONOFTHECOMPAREDEXISTING
the algorithm and, considering its superior performance, the
ALGORITHMSWITHADJUSTEDp-VALUES
additional cost can be considered acceptable.
VI. FURTHERANALYSIS
After confirming the superior performance of APTGP in
Section V, we conduct further analysis in this section. First,
to investigate the effect of each new component in APTGP
on its overall performance, we consider different variants of
APTGPandexaminetheirperformancesinSectionVI-A.One
the justification for using the mean value to compare the of the main goals of this work is to maintain the population
algorithms’ performances. Hence, to check the existence of diversity and we investigate this in Sections VI-B and VI-C.
significant difference between the algorithm performances on Finally, Section VI-D investigates the quality of the knowl-
each problem, we performed a Wilcoxon rank-sum teston the edge source in terms of the number of unique individuals it
resultsofeachproblemandconfirmedthatAPTGPissuperior containsandtheeffectitcanhaveonthequalityofknowledge
toallthecomparedalgorithmsinthemajorityofthescenarios. transfer.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
320 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.27,NO.2,APRIL2023
Fig.3. ConvergencecurveofAPTGPandsomeexistingtransfermethods.(a)FromUgdb23,from10toUgdb12witheightvehicles(Scn.14).(b)From
Ugdb7withfivevehiclestoUgdb1,sixvehicles(Scn.18).(c)Ugdb3,fromfivetosevenvehicles(Scn.20).(d)Ugdb6,fromfivetosevenvehicles(Scn.35).
(e)Ugdb21,fromsixtofourvehicles(Scn.37).(f)Ugdb7,fromfivetofourvehicles(Scn.38).
Fig.4. PerformanceviolinplotsofAPTGPandthecomparedtransferalgorithms.(a)fromUegl-1-CwitheightvehiclestoUgdb13,fivevehicles(Scn.9).
(b)Ugdb3,fromfivetosixvehicles(Scn.31).(c)Ugdb21,fromsixtofivevehicles(Scn.42).
4) A surrogate model that allows the algorithm to evaluate
more individuals.
5) Aduplicateremovalmechanismthatremovesredundant
individuals when exchanging immigrants.
In order to investigate the contributions of each component to
the effectiveness of APTGP, we conducted additional experi-
ments with the following versions of APTGP in which one or
more of the components were disabled.
1) APTGP-NT: The APTGP with no knowledge transfer
in initialization. It randomly generates the initial GP
population for the target instance.
Fig.5. Sizeoftheprogramsevolvedwiththecomparedalgorithms. 2) APTGP-NA: The APTGP with no auxiliary popula-
tion. After the initialization with transfer, it runs the
traditional GP for the target instance.
A. Component Analysis
3) APTGP-SE: The APTGP with a simple exchange
APTGP consists of the following main novel components. scheme, which replaces all the low-quality individuals
1) Initialization with the transferred knowledge. with the immigrants from the other population.
2) An auxiliary population that is evolved alongside the 4) APTGP-ND: The APTGP with no duplicate removal
main population. when initializing APTGP.
3) A knowledge exchange mechanism that promotes 5) APTGP-SA: The surrogate assisted APTGP, which has
diversity and quality of the populations. no explicit auxiliary population, but generates an extra
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ANSARIARDEHetal.:KNOWLEDGETRANSFERGPWITHAUXILIARYPOPULATION 321
Fig.6. Programsevolvedwiththecomparedalgorithms.
TABLEVI
TESTPERFORMANCEOF30INDEPENDENTRUNSOFAPTGP
ANDITSVARIANTS(MEAN±STD)
Fig.7. Trainingtimeofthecomparedalgorithms.
1024 offspring from the main population in each gener-
ation as the auxiliary population.
AllthevariantsofAPTGPexcept APTGP-NAgenerates2000
offspring in each generation, evaluate 1024 offspring by the
actual evaluation, while the other 1024 offspring by the KNN
surrogate model. APTGP-NA uses a traditional GPHH pro-
cessinthetargetinstance,whichgeneratesandevaluates1024
offspring in each generation.
Table VI presents the test performance of APTGP and its
variants. For each scenario (row), the entry with the best
mean value is highlighted in boldface. We also conducted the
Friedmantest,andshowtheranksofeachcomparedalgorithm
and the p-value at the bottom of the table. As can be seen,
APTGP has the best test performance (lowest rank of 1.68)
andthep-valueisclosetozero,indicatingthatthedifferences
among the compared algorithms are statistically significant.
For post-hoc pairwise comparison, the adjusted p-values of
theconoverpairwisecomparisons[65]aregiveninTableVII.
From the table, it can be seen that APTGP significantly
outperformed APTGP-NA, APTGP-SE, and APTGP-ND. The
advantage of APTGP over APTGP-NA indicates that with-
out using the auxiliary population in the search process, the
performanceofAPTGPdegradessignificantly.Thisisanindi-
cator of the important role that the auxiliary population plays
in the algorithm. On the other hand, using an auxiliary pop-
ulation with a simple knowledge exchange mechanism is not
enoughforachievingsignificantimprovements,sinceAPTGP- The advantage of APTGP over APTGP-ND indicates that
SE and APTGP-NA are statistically similar and APTGP-SE duplicate removal increases the amount of useful knowledge
was ranked even worse than APTGP-NA. that is inherited from the source which in turn, highlights the
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
322 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.27,NO.2,APRIL2023
TABLEVII
POST-HOCCOMPARISONOFTHEAPTGPANDITSVARIANTS
negative impact that the presence of duplicates in the source
knowledgecanhaveontheperformanceonthetargetinstance.
Fig.8. Populationentropyofthecomparedalgorithms.
Compared with APTGP-NT, the p-value was 0.02, which is
veryclosetothesignificanceleveloftheBonferronicorrection
(0.05/4 = 0.0125 for the four comparisons between APTGP
and other four algorithms). From Table VI, we see that the
rank of APTGP-NT is 2.62, closer to the rank of APTGP than
APTGP-NA, APTGP-SE, and APTGP-ND, and obtained the
best test performance on ten scenarios. This shows that even
without the initial transfer, APTGP can still be quite effec-
tive due to the use of an auxiliary population for knowledge
transfer during the search process. Meanwhile, the consider-
able difference between APTGP and APTGP-NT (rank 1.68
versus rank 2.62) shows the effectiveness of the knowledge
transfer in the initial population of the target instance.
APTGP-SAshowedtheclosesttestperformancetoAPTGP.
Itsrankwas2.6,andthep-valuewas0.02,slightlylargerthan
the corrected significance level of 0.0125. It achieved the best
Fig.9. Curveofthepopulationentropyofthecomparedalgorithmsforsome
test performance on 11 scenarios. However, we can still see representativescenarios.
the advantage of APTGP over APTGP-SA, as APTGP still
has a much better rank (1.68 versus 2.6) and performed the
best on 21 scenarios. This verifies the effectiveness of using effective APTGP was in maintaining and increasing the diver-
the auxiliary population instead of directly generating extra sityduringthesearchprocess.Forthispurpose,weemploythe
offspring and evaluate using the surrogate model. entropy measure [67] for calculating the population diversity.
It should also be noted that APTGP-NA and APTGP-SE TocomputetheentropyofthepopulationPop,wegroupedthe
had similar performances. Both algorithms transfer unique similar individuals into a set of clusters C using the DBScan
individuals, but APTGP-SE additionally performs a simple clustering algorithm [68], where each individual is character-
knowledge exchange that does not consider the possible pres- ized by the phenotypic vector [49] and the cluster radius was
ence of duplicates. Hence, not only the algorithm does not set to zero. Then, the(cid:3)entropy of the population is calculated
benefit from the exchange of knowledge, its slightly inferior as entropy(Pop)=− c∈C (|c|/|Pop|)log(|c|/|Pop|).
performance indicates that the exchange was even harmful. Fig. 8 presents the distribution of the entropy of the pop-
Thiscouldbeattributedtopossibilitythattheexchangemech- ulations during the evolutionary process of the compared
anism may have increased duplicates in the main population. algorithms. For each algorithm, the entropy of the popula-
The damage of this effect is to the point that APTGP-NT, tions in all the generations of all the 30 runs are taken into
which does not utilize any transferred knowledge, has a sig- account. From Fig. 8, we can clearly see that APTGP man-
nificantly better performance than APTGP-SE. On the other aged to reach a much higher entropy (better diversity) of the
hand, APTGP-NT performs rather similarly to APTGP-NA. populations than the other algorithms.
Tounderstandhowthepopulationentropychangedoverthe
course of evolution, the average population entropy over the
B. Phenotypic Diversity
30 runs is plotted in Fig. 9 against GP generation for a few
The GPHH method for solving UCARP is known to suffer scenarios (we observed similar patterns for other scenarios as
from the loss of population diversity during the evolutionary well). As can be easily seen from the figure, all the compared
process [16], [19]. This property can negatively impact the algorithms started with a high degree of diversity. However,
quality of knowledge transfer since the transfer of duplicates as the evolution proceeded, all the other algorithms except
reducestheamountofusefulknowledgethatcanbetransferred APTGP lost their diversity in the population rather quickly.
andmayrunintotheriskoftrappingthesearchprocessinpoor On the other hand, although APTGP also lost some of its
localoptima.Thisunderstandingwasoneofthekeyconsidera- diversity, it managed to maintain a high entropy (diversity)
tionsfordesigningAPTGP.Inthissection,weinvestigatehow over time. Another interesting observation in Fig. 9 is that the
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ANSARIARDEHetal.:KNOWLEDGETRANSFERGPWITHAUXILIARYPOPULATION 323
Fig.11. Numberofthetransferreduniqueindividualsforeachscenario.
Fig. 10(a) suggests that one may remove more duplicates
and achieve better performance by increasing the value of
the η parameter. However, when we investigated this pos-
sibility, we did not observe any significant improvement in
the results. On the contrary, there were cases in which the
performance became slightly worse. One possible reason for
this phenomenon is that as the value of η increases, more
unique individuals are likely to be discarded in favor of the
transferred immigrants. In such cases, APTGP does benefit
from the possible improvement in diversity that immigrants
could provide and it can just benefit from the exchange of the
Fig.10. Dynamicsoftheduplicateremovalmechanism.(a)Averagenumber knowledge that immigrants contain. However, as the GP evo-
of the removed duplicates. (b) Average number of trials to find a unique lution proceeds, the quality of the population also increases.
immigrant.
As a result, when unique individuals are replaced with the
immigrants,itismorelikelythatthepopulationreplacesgood
individuals with the immigrants which are not guaranteed to
initial entropy of APTGP and SUFullTree is higher that other
be good (considering that the immigrants may go through
methods. This can be explained by considering the fact that
mutation before being transferred).
bothAPTGPandSUFullTreealgorithmsplaceahighemphasis
Fig.10(b)presentstheaveragenumberoftrials(mutations)
on creating a very diverse initial population.
for APTGP to obtain a unique individual as an immigrant for
knowledge exchange. As we can see from the figure, in the
early generations, the algorithm is more likely to find out that
C. Duplicate Removal
the candidate immigrant is redundant in the target. However,
In the knowledge exchange phase of APTGP (i.e.,
as the algorithm proceeds, this likelihood decreases slightly
Algorithm6),whenselectingindividualsinapopulationtobe
because the diversity in both populations increases (as is seen
replaced with the incoming immigrants from the other pop-
in the entropy plots in Fig. 9).
ulation, the duplicates in the population are first considered
for replacement. If the population does not contain enough
D. Transferred Unique Individuals
duplicates, then low-quality unique individuals are selected
to be replaced. Fig. 10(a) presents the number of duplicates Previous studies [16], [18], [19] have indicated that GP
selected and replaced in each population over the generations may create numerous phenotypic duplicates when it solves
of APTGP, averaged over all runs on all the scenarios. As UCARP, which can reduce the effectiveness of knowl-
can be seen, throughout the evolutionary process, there exist edge transfer. This finding motivated the design of the
a large number of duplicates in the population. The num- RemoveDuplicate method in APTGP. To verify the effec-
ber of duplicates decrease slowly throughout the evolution tivenessoftheRemoveDuplicatemethod,werecordedthe
as is suggested by the downward trend of the plot and the number of unique individuals that could be transferred to the
increased standard deviation. On average, 298.67 duplicates target problem. Fig. 11 presents the distribution of the unique
were replaced in each generation of APTGP, with a standard individuals that were found in each knowledge source over
deviation of 7.14. Overall, we can see that there are a large the 30 runs. It should be noted that some scenarios share the
amount of duplicates in the population of APTGP, despite the sameknowledgesource.However,sincethedecisionsituations
pressure of the duplicate removal mechanism in APTGP. needed for phenotypic characterization are obtained from the
According to Algorithm 1, the duplicate replacement is targetproblem,thenumberofduplicatesvariesevenwhenthe
performed after the breeding operation. Since the population knowledge source is the same.
diversity is maintained at a high level at the end of each gen- According to our experiment settings, 1024×50 individ-
eration, as discussed in Section VI-B, the breeding operator uals have been examined in the GP process for solving the
is the main reason for introducing duplicates. This observa- sourceproblem.AscanbeseeninFig.11,therewereatmost
tion indicates the need for designing more effective breeding roughly around 12000 unique individuals in the knowledge
operators for solving UCARP. source (scenario 13). There are other scenarios in which this
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
324 IEEETRANSACTIONSONEVOLUTIONARYCOMPUTATION,VOL.27,NO.2,APRIL2023
numberfallsevenbelow2000individuals(e.g.,scenarios5,6, transferwhenthisassumptionisnotvalid.Finally,thepolicies
7,and8).Consequently,ifthepresenceofthislargenumberof evolvedbyAPTGPtendtobelargeanddifficulttointerpret.In
duplicates is not considered, then the quality of initial knowl- future,wewillimproveAPTGPtoproducemoreinterpretable
edge transfer will degrade. The main reason for this effect is policies and also, we plan to test our algorithm on larger
that the duplicates which initialize GP will limit the pool of real-world datasets, such as the real-world waste collection
usefulinformationthatthesearchcanbeginwith.Asaconse- datasets in [69].
quence,GPwillrequiremoreeffortforinvestigatingthesearch
space.Toverifythis,weconsideredAPTGP-NAthatdoesnot REFERENCES
utilizetheauxiliarypopulation,andcompareditsperformance
[1] Y. Mei, K. Tang, and X. Yao, “Capacitated arc routing problem in
againsttheresultsobtainedwiththeFullTreeandGPHHalgo-
uncertain environments,” in Proc. IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput., 2010,
rithms with Friedman’s test. The test ranked APTGP-NA as pp.1–8.
thebestandthepost-hocanalysisrevealedittobesignificantly [2] J.Liu,K.Tang,andX.Yao,“Robustoptimizationinuncertaincapaci-
tatedarcroutingproblems:Progressesandperspectives,”IEEEComput.
better than both other methods. On the other hand, the anal-
Intell.Mag.,vol.16,no.1,pp.63–82,Feb.2021.
ysis revealed GPHH, which does not utilize any transferred [3] L. Chen, M. Gendreau, M. H. Hà, and A. Langevin, “A robust
knowledge, and FullTree to be statistically similar. optimization approach for the road network daily maintenance routing
problem with uncertain service time,” Transp. Res. E, Logist. Transp.
For further illustration, an example of the unique trans-
Rev.,vol.85,pp.40–51,Jan.2016.
ferred individuals by APTGP is shown in Section S-III of the [4] J. F. Campbell and A. Langevin, Roadway Snow and Ice Control.
supplementary file. Boston,MA,USA:Springer,2000,pp.389–418.
[5] E. B. Tirkolaee, I. Mahdavi, M. M. S. Esfahani, and G.-W. Weber,
“Ahybridaugmentedantcolonyoptimizationforthemulti-tripcapac-
itated arc routing problem under fuzzy demands for urban solid waste
VII. CONCLUSION management,”WasteManag.Res.,vol.38,pp.156–172,Feb.2020.
[6] S. Wøhlk, A Decade of Capacitated Arc Routing. Boston, MA, USA:
In this work, a novel transfer optimization algorithm for
Springer,2008,pp.29–48.
GP, called APTGP, was proposed to evolve routing policies [7] B. L. Golden and R. T. Wong, “Capacitated arc routing problems,”
for UCARP. In APTGP, all the routing policies that GP has Networks,vol.11,no.3,pp.305–315,1981.
[8] Y.Liu,Y.Mei,M.Zhang,andZ.Zhang,“Automatedheuristicdesign
examined for solving a source problem are considered as the
using genetic programming hyper-heuristic for uncertain capacitated
transferable knowledge. First, we propose to remove dupli- arc routing problem,” in Proc. Genet. Evol. Comput. Conf., 2017,
cates before using the source individuals to initialize the GP pp.290–297.
[9] Y.MeiandM.Zhang,“Geneticprogramminghyper-heuristicformulti-
populationforthetargetproblem.Then,duringthesearchpro-
vehicleuncertaincapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”inProc.Genet.Evol.
cess, the transferred knowledge is retained and evolved in a Comput.Conf.Companion,2018,pp.141–142.
separate auxiliary population alongside the main population. [10] J.MacLachlan,Y.Mei,J.Branke,andM.Zhang,“Geneticprogramming
hyper-heuristics with vehicle collaboration for uncertain capacitated
The auxiliary population is evolved with a surrogate model
arc routing problems,” Evol. Comput., vol. 28, no. 4, pp.563–593,
that is learned from the main population. The main purpose Dec.2020.
of the auxiliary population is to help GP address the issue [11] J. Branke, T. Hildebrandt, and B. Scholz-Reiter, “Hyper-heuristic evo-
lutionofdispatchingrules:Acomparisonofrulerepresentations,”Evol.
of losing its population diversity and increase its exploration
Comput.,vol.23,no.2,pp.249–277,Jun.2015.
capabilities.Toachievethis,anelaborateknowledgeexchange [12] S. J. Louis and J. McDonnell, “Learning with case-injected genetic
mechanism is devised to share high quality and unique algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 8, no. 4, pp.316–328,
Aug.2004.
individuals between the main and auxiliary populations.
[13] A. Gupta, Y.-S. Ong, and L. Feng, “Insights on transfer optimization:
TheeffectivenessofAPTGPhasbeenverifiedbycomparing Because experience is the best teacher,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics
withthestate-of-the-artalgorithmsonawiderangeoftransfer Comput.Intell.,vol.2,no.1,pp.51–64,Feb.2018.
[14] B. Al-Helali, Q. Chen, B. Xue, and M. Zhang, “A new imputation
scenarios.OuranalysisdemonstratedthatAPTGPmanagedto
method based on genetic programming and weighted KNN for sym-
significantly outperform all the state-of-the-art GP algorithms bolic regression with incomplete data,” Soft Comput., vol. 25, no. 8,
with knowledge transfer. Additionally, we demonstrated that pp.5993–6012,Apr.2021.
[15] B. Al-Helali, Q. Chen, B. Xue, and M. Zhang, “Multitree genetic
APTGP helped GP overcome the limitation of losing pop-
programming with new operators for transfer learning in symbolic
ulation diversity. Furthermore, we conducted a detailed set regression with incomplete data,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 25,
of control experiments to verify the effectiveness and the no.6,pp.1049–1063,Dec.2021.
[16] M. A. Ardeh, Y. Mei, and M. Zhang, “Transfer learning in genetic
contribution of each novel component of APTGP.
programminghyper-heuristicforsolvinguncertaincapacitatedarcrout-
Thereareseveralpossibledirectionsforfutureworks.First, ing problem,” in Proc. IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput., Wellington, New
the knowledge exchange mechanism of APTGP searches the Zealand,2019,pp.49–56.
[17] M.A.Ardeh,Y.Mei,andM.Zhang,“AGPHHwithsurrogate-assisted
receiving population to ensure the candidate individual for
knowledge transfer for uncertain capacitated arc routing problem,” in
knowledge transfer is not present there. However, our mecha- Proc.Symp.Ser.Comput.Intell.,2021,pp.2786–2793.
nismonlyconsidersthecurrentpopulationanddoesnotcheck [18] M. A. Ardeh, Y. Mei, and M. Zhang, “Genetic programming hyper-
heuristic with knowledge transfer for uncertain capacitated arc routing
ifthecandidatehasbeenseeninearliergenerationsornot.We
problem,” in Proc. Genet. Evol. Comput. Conf. Companion, 2019,
intend to address this shortcoming in future. Also, the knowl- pp.334–335.
edge exchange mechanism of APTGP does not consider the [19] M. A. Ardeh, Y. Mei, and M. Zhang, “A novel genetic program-
ming algorithm with knowledge transfer for uncertain capacitated arc
possibility that the set of immigrants may contain duplicates
routing problem,” in PRICAI: Trends in Artificial Intelligence. Cham,
that, through transfer, may introduce duplicates in the receiv- Switzerland:Springer,2019,pp.196–200.
ingpopulation.Furthermore,APTGPisdesignedbasedonthe [20] M. A. Ardeh, Y. Mei, and M. Zhang, “Genetic programming hyper-
heuristics with probabilistic prototype tree knowledge transfer for
assumption that the source and target problems are related
uncertaincapacitatedarcroutingproblems,”inProc.IEEECongr.Evol.
and hence, does not have any measures to prevent negative Comput.,Glasgow,U.K.,2020,pp.1–8.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ANSARIARDEHetal.:KNOWLEDGETRANSFERGPWITHAUXILIARYPOPULATION 325
[21] T. T. H. Dinh, T. H. Chu, and Q. U. Nguyen, “Transfer learning in [44] M.PelikanandM.W.Hauschild,“Distance-basedbiasinmodel-directed
genetic programming,” in Proc. IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput., 2015, optimization of additively decomposable problems,” in Proc. 14th Int.
pp.1145–1151. Conf.Genet.Evol.Comput.,NewYork,USA,2012,pp.273–280.
[22] E. Haslam, B. Xue, and M. Zhang, “Further investigation on genetic [45] M.W.HauschildandM.Pelikan,“Intelligentbiasofnetworkstructures
programming with transfer learning for symbolic regression,” in Proc. in the hierarchical BOA,” in Proc. 11th Annu. Genet. Evol. Comput.
IEEECongr.Evol.Comput.,2016,pp.3598–3605. Conf.,NewYork,USA,2009,pp.413–420.
[23] K. Deb, Two Approaches for Single and Multi-Objective Dynamic [46] M. A. Ardeh, Y. Mei, and M. Zhangz, “Diversity-driven knowledge
Optimization.Berlin,Germany:Springer,2013,pp.99–116. transferforGPHHtosolveuncertaincapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”
[24] T. T. Nguyen, S. Yang, and J. Branke, “Evolutionary dynamic inProc.Symp.Ser.Comput.Intell.,2020,pp.2407–2414.
optimization: A survey of the state of the art,” Swarm Evol. Comput., [47] M. A. Ardeh, Y. Mei, and M. Zhang, “Surrogate-assisted genetic pro-
vol.6,pp.1–24,Oct.2012. grammingwithdiversetransferfortheuncertaincapacitatedarcrouting
problem,”inProc.IEEECongr.Evol.Comput.,2021,pp.628–635.
[25] J.Wang,K.Tang,J.A.Lozano,andX.Yao,“Estimationofthedistri-
[48] R.Cheng,C.He,Y.Jin,andX.Yao,“Model-basedevolutionaryalgo-
butionalgorithmwithastochasticlocalsearchforuncertaincapacitated
rithms:Ashortsurvey,”ComplexIntell.Syst.,vol.4,no.4,pp.283–292,
arc routing problems,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 20, no. 1,
2018.
pp.96–109,Feb.2016.
[49] T. Hildebrandt and J. Branke, “On using surrogates with genetic
[26] J. Wang, K. Tang, and X. Yao, “A memetic algorithm for uncertain
programming,”Evol.Comput.,vol.23,no.3,pp.343–367,2015.
capacitatedarcroutingproblems,”inProc.WorkshopMemeticComput.,
[50] H. Tong, C. Huang, L. L. Minku, and X. Yao, “Surrogate models
2013,pp.72–79.
in evolutionary single-objective optimization: A new taxonomy and
[27] H.Tong,L.L.Minku,S.Menzel,B.Sendhoff,andX.Yao,“Towards
experimentalstudy,”Inf.Sci.,vol.562,pp.414–437,Jul.2021.
novel meta-heuristic algorithms for dynamic capacitated arc routing
[51] A. Gupta, Y.-S. Ong, and L. Feng, “Multifactorial evolution: Toward
problems,” in Parallel Problem Solving from Nature (PPSN XVI),
evolutionarymultitasking,” IEEETrans. Evol.Comput., vol. 20,no.3,
T.Bäcketal.,Eds.Cham,Switzerland:Springer,2020,pp.428–440.
pp.343–357,Jun.2016.
[28] J.R.Koza,GeneticProgramming:OntheProgrammingofComputers
[52] L.Fengetal.,“Solvinggeneralizedvehicleroutingproblemwithocca-
byMeansofNaturalSelection.Cambridge,MA,USA:MIT,1992.
sional drivers via evolutionary multitasking,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
[29] A.DeLorenzo,A.Bartoli,M.Castelli,E.Medvet,andB.Xue,“Genetic vol.51,no.6,pp.3171–3184,Jun.2021.
programming in the twenty-first century: A bibliometric and content- [53] K. K. Bali, Y.-S. Ong, A. Gupta, and P. S. Tan, “Multifactorial evolu-
based analysis from both sides of the fence,” Genet. Program. Evol. tionaryalgorithmwithonlinetransferparameterestimation:MFEA-II,”
Mach.,vol.21,pp.181–204,Jul.2019. IEEETrans.Evol.Comput.,vol.24,no.1,pp.69–83,Feb.2020.
[30] F. Zhang, Y. Mei, S. Nguyen, and M. Zhang, “Evolving scheduling [54] L. Zhou et al., “Toward adaptive knowledge transfer in multifacto-
heuristics via genetic programming with feature selection in dynamic rial evolutionary computation,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 5,
flexible job-shop scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 4, pp.2563–2576,May2021.
pp.1797–1811,Apr.2021. [55] L. Feng et al., “Explicit evolutionary multitasking for combinatorial
[31] S.Wang,Y.Mei,andM.Zhang,“Novelensemblegeneticprogramming optimization: A case study on capacitated vehicle routing problem,”
hyper-heuristicsforuncertaincapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”inProc. IEEETrans.Cybern.,vol.51,no.6,pp.3143–3156,Jun.2021.
Genet.Evol.Comput.Conf.,NewYork,NY,USA,2019,pp.1093–1101. [56] J.Zhong,L.Feng,W.Cai,andY.-S.Ong,“Multifactorialgeneticpro-
[32] S. Wang, Y. Mei, and M. Zhang, “A multi-objective genetic pro- grammingforsymbolicregressionproblems,”IEEETrans.Syst.,Man,
gramminghyper-heuristicapproachtouncertaincapacitatedarcrouting Cybern.,Syst.,vol.50,no.11,pp.4492–4505,Nov.2020.
problems,”inProc.IEEECongr.Evol.Comput.,2020,pp.1–8. [57] M.A.Ardeh,Y.Mei,andM.Zhang,“Anovelmulti-taskgeneticpro-
[33] S. Wang, Y. Mei, M. Zhang, and X. Yao, “Genetic program- gramming approach to uncertain capacitated arc routing problem,” in
ming with niching for uncertain capacitated arc routing problem,” Proc.ACMGenet.Evol.Comput.Conf.,2021,pp.759–767.
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 73–87, Feb. 2022, [58] R. K. Arakaki and F. L. Usberti, “An efficiency-based path-scanning
doi:10.1109/TEVC.2021.3095261. heuristicforthecapacitatedarcroutingproblem,”Comput.Oper.Res.,
[34] Y.Liu,Y.Mei,M.Zhang,andZ.Zhang,“Apredictive-reactiveapproach vol.103,pp.288–295,Mar.2019.
with genetic programming and cooperative coevolution for the uncer- [59] G.Ruan,L.L.Minku,S.Menzel,B.Sendhoff,andX.Yao,“Whenand
tain capacitated arc routing problem,” Evol. Comput., vol. 28, no. 2, howtotransferknowledgeindynamicmulti-objectiveoptimization,”in
pp.289–316,Jun.2020. Proc.IEEESymp.Ser.Comput.Intell.,2019,pp.2034–2041.
[35] B.KoçerandA.Arslan,“Genetictransferlearning,”ExpertSyst.Appl., [60] G. Ruan, L. L. Minku, S. Menzel, B. Sendhoff, and X. Yao,
vol.37,no.10,pp.6997–7002,2010. “Computationalstudyoneffectivenessofknowledgetransferindynamic
multi-objective optimization,” in Proc. IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput.,
[36] M.Iqbal,B.Xue,H.Al-Sahaf,andM.Zhang,“Cross-domainreuseof
2020,pp.1–8.
extractedknowledgeingeneticprogrammingforimageclassification,”
[61] T.H.Cormen,C.E.Leiserson,R.L.Rivest,andC.Stein,Introduction
IEEETrans.Evol.Comput.,vol.21,no.4,pp.569–587,Aug.2017.
to Algorithms, 3rd ed. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2009, ch.
[37] D. O’Neill, H. Al-Sahaf, B. Xue, and M. Zhang, “Common sub-
HashTable,p.1320.
trees in related problems: A novel transfer learning approach for
[62] R. G. Reynolds, “An introduction to cultural algorithms,” in Proc. 3rd
genetic programming,” in Proc. IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput., 2017,
Annu.Conf.Evol.Program.,1994,pp.131–139.
pp.1287–1294.
[63] T.-T.NguyenandX.Yao,“Anexperimentalstudyofhybridizingcultural
[38] L.Feng,Y.-S.Ong,S.Jiang,andA.Gupta,“Autoencodingevolutionary
algorithms and local search,” Int. J. Neural Syst., vol.18 1, pp.1–17,
searchwithlearningacrossheterogeneousproblems,”IEEETrans.Evol.
2008.
Comput.,vol.21,no.5,pp.760–772,Oct.2017.
[64] M.G.Kendall,“Anewmeasureofrankcorrelation,”Biometrika,vol.30,
[39] L. Feng et al., “Evolutionary multitasking via explicit autoencoding,”
nos.1–2,pp.81–93,Jun.1938.
IEEETrans.Cybern.,vol.49,no.9,pp.3457–3470,Sep.2019.
[65] W.J.Conover,PracticalNonparametricStatistics,vol.350.NewYork,
[40] L. Feng, W. Zhou, W. Liu, Y.-S. Ong, and K. C. Tan, NY,USA:Wiley,1998.
“Solving dynamic multiobjective problem via autoencoding evolu- [66] Y.BenjaminiandY.Hochberg,“Controllingthefalsediscoveryrate:A
tionary search,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., early access, Oct. 1, 2020, practicalandpowerfulapproachtomultipletesting,”J.Roy.Stat.Soc.
doi:10.1109/TCYB.2020.3017017. Ser.B,Methodol.,vol.57,no.1,pp.289–300,1995.
[41] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol, [67] E. K. Burke, S. Gustafson, and G. Kendall, “Diversity in genetic pro-
“Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a gramming:Ananalysisofmeasuresandcorrelationwithfitness,”IEEE
deep network with a local denoising criterion,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., Trans.Evol.Comput.,vol.8,no.1,pp.47–62,Feb.2004.
vol.11,pp.3371–3408,Dec.2010. [68] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based
[42] L.Feng,Y.-S.Ong,M.-H.Lim,andI.W.Tsang,“Memeticsearchwith algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with
interdomain learning: A realization between CVRP and CARP,” IEEE noise,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 1996,
Trans.Evol.Comput.,vol.19,no.5,pp.644–658,Oct.2015. pp.226–231.
[43] L. Feng, Y.-S. Ong, A.-H. Tan, and I. W. Tsang, “Memes as building [69] W.Lan,Z.Ye,P.Ruan,J.Liu,P.Yang,andX.Yao,“Region-focused
blocks: A case study on evolutionary optimization + transfer learning memetic algorithms with smart initialisation for real-world large-scale
for routing problems,” Memetic Comput., vol. 7, no. 3, pp.159–180, waste collection problems,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., early access,
2015. Nov.2,2021,doi:10.1109/TEVC.2021.3123960.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on April 29,2026 at 09:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
